What is the cost of lies?
It's not that we'll mistake them for the truth.
The real danger is that if we hear enough lies,
then we no longer recognize the truth at all.
What can we do then?
What else is left but to abandon even the hope of truth
and content ourselves instead with stories?
In these stories, it doesn't matter who the heroes are.
All we want to know is: who is to blame?
In this story, it was Anatoly Dyatlov.
He was the best choice.
An arrogant, unpleasant man,
he ran the room that night, he gave the orders...
and no friends.
Or, at least, not important ones.
And now Dyatlov will spend the next ten years
in a prison labor camp.
Of course, that sentence is doubly unfair.
There were far greater criminals than him at work.
And as for what Dyatlov did do,
the man doesn't deserve prison.
He deserves death.
But instead, ten years for "criminal mismanagement."
What does that mean?
No one knows. It doesn't matter.
What does matter is that, to them,
justice was done.
Because, you see, to them
a just world is a sane world.
There was nothing sane about Chernobyl.
What happened there, what happened after,
even the good we did, all of it...
all of it... madness.
Well, I've given you everything I know.
They'll deny it, of course.
They always do.
I know you'll try your best.
Lyudmilla?
Comrade Dyatlov!
Comrade Dyatlov! Comrade Dyatlov!
Comrade Dyatlov! Comrade Dyatlov!
What just happened?
I don't know.
There's a fire in the turbine hall.
The turbine hall.
The control system tank. Hydrogen.
You and Toptunov, you morons blew the tank!
- No, that's not... - This is an emergency.
Everyone stay calm. Our first priority is...
- It's exploded! - We know.
Akimov, are we cooling the reactor core?
We shut it down, but the control rods are still active.
They're not all the way in, I disengaged the clutch.
Try and disconnect the servos from the standby console.
You two, get the backup pumps running.
We need water moving through the core.
- That is all that matters. - There is no core.
It exploded, the core exploded.
He's in shock. Get him out of here.
The lid is off!
The stack is burning. I saw it.
You're confused. RBMK reactor cores don't explode.
- Akimov... - Sasha.
Don't worry, we did everything right.
Something... something strange has happened.
- Do you taste metal? - Akimov!
Comrade Perevozschenko, what you're saying is physically impossible.
The core can't explode. It has to be the tank.
We're wasting time. Let's go.
Get the hydrogen out of the generators and pump water into the core.
- What about the fire? - Call the fire brigade.
You're not on call tonight.
They're bringing everybody in, military and civil.
Pripyat, Polesskoe, Kiev.
This is a big one.
But it doesn't look right, the color.
Pravik says he thinks they're shining floodlights or something.
And what if there are chemicals?
Chemicals?
The problem's the roof.
It's covered in tar, so it's gonna burn all night,
and it'll stink like hell. That's it.
That's the worst of it.
Go back to bed.
- Is it war? - Where's the dosimeter?
Here... Here.
Are they bombing?
What the fuck is this? It's 3.6 roentgen.
That's as high as it goes. The good one's locked in a safe.
I don't have a key.
Valera... your face.
Come on.
I'm going to find Khodemchuk in the pump room.
You... here.
Get Shashenok. He's in 604. Go.
We need to get everyone out!
Shit.
Hey! We need to get to the reactor hall.
- The lift's destroyed. - Up two flights and across.
- Right. - Why are you going there?
Have you seen Khodemchuk?
- No. Where's Viktor? - Still in the pump room.
Stay here. I'll come back.
Viktor!
Viktor.
Viktor.
Viktor. I'm gonna get you out of here.
Can you stand?
Khodemchuk...
Where?
Get Khodemchuk.
I dropped the control rods from the other panel.
- They're still up. - What?
They're still only a third of the way in, I don't know why.
I already sent the trainees down to the reactor hall to lower them by hand.
- What about the pumps? - I can't get through to Khodemchuk.
- The lines are down. - Fuck the phones and fuck Khodemchuk.
- Are the pumps on or not? - Stolyarchuk?
My control panel's not working.
I tried calling for the electricians.
I don't give a shit about the panel!
I need water in my reactor core!
Get down there and make sure those pumps are on.
Now!
What does the dosimeter say?
3.6 roentgen, but that's as high as the meter...
3.6... not great, not terrible.
We did everything right.
Vasily...
- Hey, Vasily, what's this? - I don't know, Misha.
Don't fuck around with it. Hook these up, come on.
Do you taste metal?
- Yeah, what is that? - I don't know.
The valves, Misha! The valves, let's go!
The valves! Come on!
What do you need?
We need to get into the reactor hall
to lower the control rods, but the door is jammed.
I don't think there are control rods.
I don't think there's a core.
No, you're... You're mistaken.
Akimov said.
Let's go.
No!
Ignatenko, get on his hose!
It's all right. Breathe.
Misha.
All right, all right. Easy, Misha.
Are you sure?
Akimov...
Move.
Come on, go!
Let's go!
Let's go!
Hey!
Hey!
Lyudmilla! Do you want to come with us?
Come where?
We're going to the railroad bridge to get a better look.
It's not like anyone can sleep with all the sirens.
I don't think you should go. It could be dangerous.
What do you mean dangerous? It's a fire. It's over there, we're over here.
- Mikhail. - What?
Oh, sorry.
Oh.
- Is Vasily...? - Yeah.
Did he say it was bad?
No. No, he said it was just the roof.
Well, he's never gotten hurt before.
None of the boys have.
He'll be fine.
Get some rest.
The tank, it's big enough.
This kind of explosion, the control tank on 71, it's 100 cubic meters.
One hundred and ten.
Hundred and ten. It could do this, definitely.
It's gone.
I looked right into it.
I looked into the core.
Did you lower the control rods or not?
Take him to the infirmary.
Toptunov, take him!
- Where's Kudryavstev? - He fell.
- I need a medic! Anyone! - He's delusional.
- His face... - Ruptured condenser lines.
The feedwater is mildly contaminated.
He'll be fine. I've seen worse.
Do we still have a phone line to the outside?
Akimov?
Call in the day shift.
- But if the... - We have to keep water flowing into the core.
We need electricians, mechanics, we need bodies.
How many times do I have to say it?
I'm going to the Administration Building now
to call Bryukhanov and Fomin.
They're gonna want a full report.
Now, I don't know if I can make things better for you,
but I can certainly make them worse.
Call in the day shift, Comrade Akimov.
Yes, Comrade Dyatlov.
You're doing fine.
Raise her up.
That one, maybe an hour.
This one, not until morning.
- How's it downstairs, doctor? - Quiet.
Always is.
Nothing at this hour but babies.
You know, I once went two days without sleep?
Ten women went into labor at the same time.
- Did I ever tell you that story? - Yes.
Well, I won't need you in here for a while.
If you want, get some rest in the break room.
They haven't brought anyone in from the fire.
- What fire? - The power plant.
Oh. Then it mustn't be too bad.
Do we stock iodine?
- Hmm? - Iodine.
You mean disinfectant?
No, pills. Does the hospital stock iodine pills?
Iodine pills? Why would we have iodine pills?
Hello?
Hello?
Who else knows this?
Have you called Fomin?
Of course I want you to call him.
If I'm up, he's up.
Whatever the cause, the important thing is
that neither you nor I...
I take it the safety test was a failure?
- We have the situation under control. - Under control?
- It doesn't look like it's under control. - Shut up, Fomin.
I have to tell the Central Committee about this. Do you realize that?
I have to get on the phone and tell Maryin,
or God forbid Frolyshev,
that my power plant is on fire.
No one can blame you for this, Director Bryukhanov.
Of course no one can blame me for this.
How can I be responsible? I was sleeping.
Tell me what happened, quickly.
We ran the test exactly as Chief Engineer Fomin approved.
Unit Shift Chief Akimov and Engineer Toptunov
encountered technical difficulties leading
to an accumulation of hydrogen in the control system tank.
It regrettably ignited,
damaging the plant, setting the roof on fire.
The tank is quite large.
It's the only logical explanation.
Of course, Deputy Chief Engineer Dyatlov
was directly supervising the test,
so he would know best.
A hydrogen tank, fire...
- Reactor? - We're taking measures to ensure
a steady flow of water through the core.
- What about radiation? - Obviously, down here it's nothing.
But in the reactor building, I'm being told
3.6 roentgen per hour.
Well, that's not great, but it's not horrifying.
Not at all.
- From the feedwater, I assume? - Mm-hmm.
We'll have to limit shifts
to six hours at a time, but otherwise...
The dosimetrists should be checking regularly.
Have them use the good meter from the safe.
Right. I'll call Maryin.
Have them wake up the local executive committee.
There'll be orders coming down.
- Here. - No.
You sure? Okay.
- What do you think makes the colors? - Oh...
- It's the fuel for sure. - "Oh. It's the fuel for sure"?
What do you know about it? You clean floors at a train station.
My friend, Yuri, works at the power plant.
He says it runs cold.
No gas, no fire. Just atoms.
Yuri says the only thing is, you can't walk right up to the fuel.
If you do, a glass of vodka an hour for four hours.
Isn't Yuri a plumber?
At the nuclear power plant, yeah.
It is beautiful.
Yeah.
Do you have a cigarette?
Do you need help?
It's over.
We've done all we can from the perimeter.
Vasily! You've gotta put it out.
That's enough, comrades. We're pushing ahead.
Come on, boys.
Vasily, it's just past, straight up.
All the way up, all the way in.
Come on!
Yeah. Going in now.
What about the auxiliary?
The pumps are gone, electrical's gone.
- The core? - I didn't go in there, and I won't.
- I think it's time we faced... - No, we have to get water into the core.
Otherwise, there'll be a meltdown.
We have to open the valves.
- Sasha... - What do you want, Boris?
If it's true, then we're dead, a million people are dead.
Is that what you need to hear?
We have to open the valves.
- By hand. - By hand?
You know, the number of valves, the amount of time to turn them,
you're talking about hours in there!
- Then help us. - Help you do what?
Pump water into a ditch? There's nothing there!
Leonid, I'm begging you.
Watch the panel while we're gone.
It's not working.
Just watch it.
I guess we know why they called us in early.
Is anyone saying what happened?
They were running the safety test on the turbines,
blew the control system tank.
It doesn't make sense to me either.
What about sabotage?
A bomb?
Sitnikov! Bryukhanov wants us to use the good dosimeter,
but it's in the safe, and we can't find the key.
It's in Building 2. Hasn't...?
Follow me.
Gentlemen, welcome.
Please, uh, find a seat. Plenty of room.
I apologize for the lateness of the hour.
Rest assured, we are all very safe down here.
We built this shelter to withstand a nuclear attack
by the Americans, so I think we'll be fine.
As you can see, we have experienced an accident.
A large control tank malfunctioned,
damaging reactor Building 4 and starting a fire.
Now, I have spoken directly to Deputy Secretary Maryin.
Maryin spoke to Deputy Chief Frolyshev,
Frolyshev to Central Committee member Dolgikh,
and Dolgikh to General Secretary Gorbachev.
Now...
Because the Central Committee has the greatest respect
for the work of the Pripyat Executive Committee,
they have asked me to brief you on matters as they stand, so...
- First, the accident... - is well under control.
And second, because the efforts of the Soviet nuclear industry
are considered key state secrets, it is important
that we ensure that this incident
has no adverse consequences.
Now, to prevent a panic, the Central Committee have ordered
a detachment of military police to Pripyat.
How large of a detachment?
Between two and four thousand men.
What's really going on here? How dangerous is this?
There's mild radiation, but it's limited to the plant itself.
- No, it isn't. - Excuse me?
You saw men outside vomiting.
You saw men with burns.
There's more radiation than they're saying.
We have wives here, we have children.
I say we evacuate the town.
Gentlemen...
Please, please. My wife is here.
Do you think I would keep her in Pripyat
if it wasn't safe?
Bryukhanov, the air is glowing.
The Cherenkov effect. Completely normal phenomenon.
It can happen with minimal radiation.
I wonder how many of you know the name of this place.
We all call it "Chernobyl," of course.
What is its real name?
The Vladimir I. Lenin Nuclear Power Station.
Exactly.
Vladimir I. Lenin.
And how proud he would be of you all tonight.
Especially you, young man,
and the passion you have for the people.
For is that not the sole purpose of the apparatus of the State?
Sometimes, we forget.
Sometimes, we fall prey to fear.
But our faith in Soviet socialism
will always be rewarded.
Now, the State tells us the situation here is not dangerous.
Have faith, comrades.
The State tells us it wants to prevent a panic.
Listen well.
It's true, when the people see the police, they will be afraid.
But it is my experience
that when the people ask questions
that are not in their own best interest,
they should simply be told
to keep their minds on their labor
and leave matters of the State to the State.
We seal off the city.
No one leaves.
And cut the phone lines.
Contain the spread of misinformation.
That is how we keep the people
from undermining the fruits of their own labor.
Yes, comrades...
we will all be rewarded for what we do here tonight.
This is our moment to shine.
Thank you.
Comrade Sitnikov to see the Chief Engineer.
Well?
I sent my dosimetrists into the reactor building.
The large dosimeter from the safe,
the one with the 1,000-roentgen capacity...
What was the number?
There was none.
The meter burned out the second it was turned on.
- It's typical. - See? This is what Moscow does.
Sends us shit equipment, then wonders why things go wrong.
We found another dosimeter
from the military fire department.
It only goes to 200 roentgen, but it's better than the small ones.
And?
It maxed out.
Two hundred roentgen.
What game are you playing?
No, I... I...
I asked him, he took multiple measurements, he's my best man.
It's another faulty meter. You're wasting our time.
I checked the meter against the control.
What's wrong with you? How'd you get that number
from feedwater leaking from a blown tank?
- You don't. - Then what the fuck are you talking about?
I, um...
I walked around the exterior of Building 4.
I think there's graphite on the ground in the rubble.
You didn't see graphite.
- I did. - You didn't.
You didn't! Because it's not there!
What?
Are you suggesting the core... what?
Exploded?
Yes.
Sitnikov.
You're a nuclear engineer, so am I.
Please tell me how an RBMK reactor core explodes.
Not a meltdown, an explosion.
I'd love to know.
I can't.
Are you stupid?
- No. - Then why can't you?
I...
I don't see how it could explode.
- But it did. - Enough!
I'll go up to the vent block roof.
From there you can look right down into reactor Building 4.
I'll see it with my own... my own eyes.
I apologize.
Guards! Guards!
Get him to the medic or the hospital! Whatever he needs!
It's the feedwater. Been around it all night.
You go then.
What?
Go to the vent block roof and report back what you see.
No.
- No, I won't do that. - Of course you will.
You'll be fine. You'll see.
Come on.
Okay.
Let's begin.
Leonid.
Leonid.
Oh...
It's all the way, okay?
All the way open.
I'm sorry.
There's nothing to be sorry for.
I told you, we did nothing wrong.
But we did.
Hello?
- Valery Legasov? - Yes.
You are the Legasov who is the First Deputy Director
of the Kurchatov Institute of Atomic Energy?
- I am. Who am I...? - This is Boris Shcherbina,
Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers
and head of the Bureau for Fuel and Energy.
There's been an accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant.
How bad is it?
No. No need to panic. There was a fire.
It's mostly put out. The system control tank exploded.
Control system tank. And the core?
We've ordered them to continuously pump water.
Yes, I see. Any contamination?
It's mild. The plant manager, Bryukhanov, is reporting
3.6 roentgen per hour.
That's actually significant. You should evacuate the sur...
You're an expert on RBMK reactors, correct?
Yes, I've studied...
General Secretary Gorbachev has appointed a committee
to manage the accident. You're on it.
We'll convene at two this afternoon.
That late? Forgive me, but don't you think
given the amount of radiation that it would be...
Legasov, you're on this committee to answer direct questions
about the function of an RBMK reactor
if they should happen to arise. Nothing else.
Certainly not policy. Do you understand?
Yes, of course. I didn't mean to...
I'm pleased to report that
the situation in Chernobyl is stable.
In terms of radiation,
I'm told it's the equivalent of a chest X-ray.
No!
The fire is giving off nearly twice the radiation
released by the bomb in Hiroshima.
It will burn and spread its poison
until the entire continent is dead.
Tell our soldiers,
"You will need to move quickly,
and you will need to move carefully.
These are the most important 90 seconds of your lives.
I wish you good health and long life."
I serve the Soviet Union.
I serve the Soviet Union.
I serve the Soviet Union.
The official position of the state
is that a global nuclear catastrophe
is not possible in the Soviet Union.
What is the cost of lies?
Who is to blame?
It doesn't matter.
It doesn't look right.
We taste metal.
I think there's graphite on the ground.
You didn't see graphite.
You didn't because it's not there!
We seal off the city. Contain the spread of misinformation.
Secretary Gorbachev has appointed a committee
to manage the accident. You're on it.
You work too hard.
- Where is everyone? - Oh, they refused to come in.
- Why? - It's Saturday.
- Why did you come in? - I work too hard.
It's boiling in here.
Eight milliroentgen. A leak?
No.
It would've gone off before. It's coming from outside.
The Americans?
Iodine 131.
It's not military. It's uranium decay, U-235.
Reactor fuel?
Ignalina. Maybe, uh, 240 kilometers away.
Yes, this is Ulana Khomyuk
with the Institute of Nuclear En...
Looking for...?
- All right, stay calm. - Don't tell me to stay calm.
They're at four. It's not them.
- Who's the next closest? - It's Chernobyl, but that's not possible.
They're 400 kilometers away.
That's too far for eight milliroentgen.
They'd have to be split open.
Maybe they know something.
- Iodine. - Could it be a waste dump?
No.
We'd be seeing other isotopes.
Nuclear test? Uh, new kind of bomb?
We'd have heard. That's what half our people work on here.
Something with the space program like a satellite or...?
No one's answering the phone.
- Get everyone started on an IV. - We don't have enough.
- All the children then. - But we don't have enough!
As many as you can.
- Where's the old man? - He's set up a burn ward in 16.
What are you doing? What is that?
Milk. It's milk. Much better than water.
No, no, no. Stop. Stop!
- What are you doing? - These are radiation burns!
Their clothes are contaminated!
Help me!
Get it all off.
We're taking it down to the basement.
He was a firefighter from Chernobyl.
Can you stop pushing, please?
We have our orders!
- Disperse! - Hey, there! Get him!
Why you keeping us out here?
Professor Legasov?
Oh, no, not yet.
They're finishing up some other business. It'll be a few more minutes.
- Can I get you some tea? - No, I'm fine. Thank you.
Would you care to read Deputy Chairman Shcherbina's report while you wait?
Certainly. Thank you.
All right, Professor. They're ready.
Professor Legasov?
You have my support.
Thank you all for your duty to this commission.
We will begin with Deputy Chairman Shcherbina's briefing,
and then we will discuss next steps if necessary.
Thank you, comrade General Secretary.
I'm pleased to report that the situation in Chernobyl is stable.
Military and civilian patrols have secured the region,
and Colonel General Pikalov,
who commands troops specializing in chemical hazards,
has been dispatched to the plant.
In terms of radiation, plant director Bryukhanov
reports no more than 3.6 roentgen.
I'm told it's the equivalent of a chest X-ray.
So if you're overdue for a check-up...
- And foreign press? - Totally unaware.
KGB First Deputy Chairman Charkov assures me
that we have successfully protected our security interests.
Good. Very good.
Well, it seems like it's well in hand, so...
if there's nothing else, meeting adjourned.
No!
Pardon me?
Uh, we can't adjourn.
This is Professor Legasov of the Kurchatov Institute.
Professor, if you have any concerns,
feel free to address them with me later.
I can't. I am sorry. I'm so sorry.
Page three, the section on casualties.
Uh...
"A fireman was severely burned on his hand
by a chunk of smooth, black mineral
on the ground, outside the reactor building."
Smooth, black mineral... graphite.
There's-There's graphite on the ground.
Well, there was a... a tank explosion. There's debris.
- Of what importance...? - There's only one place in the entire facility
where you will find graphite: inside the core.
If there's graphite on the ground outside,
it means it wasn't a control system tank that exploded.
- It was the reactor core. - It's open!
Um, Comrade Shcherbina?
Comrade General Secretary, I can assure you
that Professor Legasov is mistaken.
Bryukhanov reports that the reactor core is intact.
- And as for the radiation... - Yes, 3.6 roentgen,
which, by the way, is not the equivalent of one chest X-ray,
but rather 400 chest X-rays.
That number's been bothering me for a different reason, though.
It's also the maximum reading on low-limit dosimeters.
They gave us the number they had.
I think the true number is much, much higher.
If I'm right, this fireman was holding the equivalent
of four million chest X-rays in his hand.
Professor Legasov, there's no place for alarmist hysteria...
It's not alarmist if it's a fact!
Well, I don't hear any facts at all.
All I hear is a man I don't know
engaging in conjecture in direct contradiction
to what has been reported by party officials.
I'm, uh... I apologize.
I didn't mean, uh...
Please, may I express my concern
as calmly and as respectfully as I...
- Professor Legasov... - Boris.
I will allow it.
An RBMK reactor
uses uranium 235 as fuel.
Every atom of U-235 is like a bullet
traveling at nearly the speed of light,
penetrating everything in its path:
woods, metal, concrete, flesh.
Every gram of U-235 holds
over a billion trillion of these bullets.
That's in one gram.
Now, Chernobyl holds over three million grams,
and right now, it is on fire.
Winds will carry radioactive particles across the entire continent,
rain will bring them down on us.
That's three million billion trillion bullets
in the... in the air we breathe,
the water we drink, the food we eat.
Most of these bullets will not stop firing for 100 years.
Some of them, not for 50,000 years.
Yes, and, uh, this concern
stems entirely from the description of a rock?
Yes.
Comrade Shcherbina...
I want you to go to Chernobyl.
You take a look at the reactor, you personally,
and you report directly back to me.
A wise decision, comrade General Secretary...
And take Professor Legasov with you.
Uh...
Forgive me, comrade General Secretary, but I...
Do you know how a nuclear reactor works?
- No. - No.
Well, then how will you know what you're looking at?
Meeting adjourned.
How does a nuclear reactor work?
- What? - It's a simple question.
It's hardly a simple answer.
Of course, you presume I'm too stupid to understand.
So I'll restate: Tell me how a nuclear reactor works,
or I'll have one of these soldiers throw you out of the helicopter.
A nuclear reactor makes electricity with steam.
The steam turns a turbine which generates electricity.
Where a typical power plant
makes steam by burning coal,
a nuclear plant...
In a nuclear plant, we use something called fission.
We take an unstable element like uranium 235,
which has too many neutrons.
- A neutron is, uh... - The bullet.
Yes, the bullet.
So, bullets are flying off of the uranium.
Now...
if we put enough uranium atoms close together,
the bullets from one atom will eventually strike another atom.
The force of this impact splits that atom apart,
releasing a tremendous amount of energy, fission.
- And the graphite? - Ah, yes.
The neutrons are actually traveling so fast... we call this "flux"...
it's relatively unlikely that the uranium atoms will ever hit one another.
In RBMK reactors, we surround the fuel rods with graphite
to moderate, slow down, the neutron flux.
Good.
I know how a nuclear reactor works.
Now I don't need you.
- Can you help me? I need to find my husband. - No. Not now.
- Mikhail! - Lyudmilla.
Take her.
Take her away from here, please.
- Get away from them! You want to get sick? Go! - Oh my God.
Please take her, please take her.
Please take her, please.
Please! Please!
Please take her!
Excuse me, I am Vasily Ignatenko's wife.
He's a fireman. Ignatenko.
Ignatenko, Sixth Paramilitary Fire and Rescue Unit.
I need to find him. Please.
Ignatenko...
He's being transported by helicopter to Moscow.
Hospital number six.
Why, is he all right? Can I see him?
You want to see him? Go to Moscow.
But they're not letting us leave here.
Tell them Major Burov allows it.
- Oh. When are they taking him? - Now.
We're approaching the power plant.
What have they done?
Can you see inside?
I don't have to. Look.
That's graphite on the roof.
The whole building's been blown open.
The core's exposed!
I can't see how you can tell that from here.
Oh, for God's sakes.
Look at that glow!
That's radiation ionizing the air!
Well, if we can't see, we don't know.
Get us directly over the building!
- Boris, if we fly... - Don't you use my name!
...directly over an open reactor, we'll be dead within a week!
Dead!
Sir?
Get us over that building, or I'll have you shot!
If you fly directly over that core, I promise you,
by tomorrow morning, you'll be begging for that bullet.
Perhaps if you came back another day.
Just wonderful.
Deputy Secretary Garanin.
Ulana Khomyuk of the Byelorussian Institute for Nuclear Energy.
What a pleasure.
- Let me introduce... - I'm here about Chernobyl.
Such a lovely time.
- Visit again soon. - I will. Thank you.
I must tell you, this is why no one likes scientists.
When we have a disease to cure, where are they?
In a lab, noses in their books, and so Grandma dies.
But when there isn't a problem,
they're everywhere, spreading fear.
- I know about Chernobyl. - Oh?
I know that the core is either partially or completely exposed.
- Whatever that means. - And that if you don't immediately
issue iodine tablets and then evacuate this city,
hundreds of thousands of people are going to get cancer,
and God knows how many more will die.
Yes, very good.
There has been an accident at Chernobyl,
but I've been assured there is no problem.
I'm telling you that there is.
I prefer my opinion to yours.
I'm a nuclear physicist.
Before you were Deputy Secretary,
you worked in a shoe factory.
Yes, I worked in a shoe factory.
And now I'm in charge.
"To the workers of the world."
Stable iodine will keep your thyroid
from absorbing radioactive iodine.
Take one a day for as long as they last.
And go east.
Get as far from Minsk as you can.
It's overkill.
Pikalov's showing off to make us look bad.
It doesn't matter how it looks.
Shcherbina is a pure bureaucrat,
as stupid as he is pigheaded.
We'll tell him the truth in the simplest terms possible.
We'll be fine.
Pikarov!
Comrade Shcherbina, Chief Engineer Fomin,
Colonel General Pikalov, and I
are honored at your arrival.
Deeply, deeply honored.
Naturally, we regret the circumstances of your visit,
but, as you can see, we are making excellent progress
in containing the damage.
We have begun our own inquiry into the cause of the accident,
and I have a list of individuals
who we believe are accountable.
Professor Legasov, I understand
you've been saying dangerous things.
Very dangerous things.
Apparently, our reactor core exploded.
Please, tell me how an RBMK reactor core explodes.
I'm not prepared to explain it at this time.
As I presumed, he has no answer.
It's disgraceful, really.
To spread disinformation at a time like this.
Why did I see graphite on the roof?
Graphite is only found in the core,
where it's used as a neutron flux moderator.
Correct?
Fomin, why did the Deputy Chairman see graphite on the roof?
Well, that... that can't be.
Comrade Shcherbina, my apologies, but graphite...
that's not possible.
Perhaps you saw burnt concrete.
Now there you made a mistake,
because I may not know much about nuclear reactors,
but I know a lot about concrete.
- Comrade, I assure you... - I understand.
You think Legasov is wrong.
How shall we prove it?
Our high-range dosimeter just arrived.
We could cover one of our trucks with lead shielding,
mount the dosimeter on the front.
Have one of your men get as close to the fire as he can.
Give him every bit of protection you have.
But understand that even with lead shielding,
it may not be enough.
Then I'll do it myself.
Good.
He's back.
It's not three roentgen.
It's 15,000.
Comrade Shcherbina...
What does that number mean?
It means the core is open.
It means the fire we're watching with our own eyes
is giving off nearly twice the radiation
released by the bomb in Hiroshima.
And that's every single hour.
Hour after hour, 20 hours since the explosion,
so 40 bombs worth by now.
Forty-eight more tomorrow.
And it will not stop. Not in a week, not in a month.
It will burn and spread its poison
until the entire continent is dead.
Please escort Comrades Bryukhanov and Fomin
to the local party headquarters.
- Thank you for your service. - Comrade...
You're excused.
Dyatlov was in charge.
It was Dyatlov!
- Tell me how to put it out. - We'll use helicopters.
- We'll drop water on it like a forest fire. - No, no. You don't understand.
This isn't a fire.
This is a fissioning reactor core
burning at over 2,000 degrees.
The heat will instantly vaporize the water...
How do we put it out?
You are dealing with something
that has never occurred on this planet before.
Boron.
Boron and sand.
Well, that'll create problems of its own,
but I-I don't see any other way.
Of course, it's going to take thousands of drops,
because you can't fly the helicopters directly over the core,
so most of it is going to miss.
- How much sand and boron? - Well, I can't be...
- For God's sake, roughly! - Five thousand tons.
And obviously, we're going to need to evacuate an enormous area...
Never mind that. Focus on the fire.
I am focusing on the fire.
The wind, it's carrying all that smoke,
all that radiation.
At least evacuate Pripyat. It's three kilometers away.
- That's my decision to make. - Then make it.
- I've been told not to. - Is it or is not...
I'm in charge here!
This will go much easier if you talk to me
about the things you do understand
and not about the things you do not understand.
Where are you going?
I'm going to get you 5,000 tons of sand and boron.
There's a hotel.
I'd prefer one of those.
Superstitious?
Moscow?
Are you here because of the fire?
Anything we should be worried about?
No.
We're in position. Approaching drop.
Clear to proceed.
Copy. We'll go one by one in rotation.
Remind them about the perimeter.
They cannot fly directly over the fire.
A minimum of a ten-meter perimeter.
Ten meter perimeter. Copy.
Lead One, per pre-flight:
maintain minimum ten-meter perimeter.
Copy that.
Forty meters... 35...
30...
No, no, no! They're too close!
They can't get over the fire. How are they supposed...
The wind will have to carry it.
Tell them, they cannot go over the core.
Lead One is too close.
I repeat, they are too close.
Copy.
Lead One, you are inside the perimeter.
Did not copy. Signal's breaking up.
Lead One?
Do you copy?
Lead One, do you copy?
Lead One, come in.
Do you copy, Lead One?
Lead One!
Sir? What do I tell the others?
Is there any other way, Legasov?
Send the next one in.
Tell them to approach from the west.
Lead Two, approach from the west.
Kurchatov Institute Laboratory Four.
Marina Gruzinskaya, it's Ulana Khomyuk from Minsk.
Oh, yes, how nice of you to phone.
- It's been too long. - It has.
I was actually calling about our friend.
- You know, the one in the country. - Oh, yes, of course.
I wanted to see how he's doing. It's so hot there right now.
Yes, it's extremely hot,
but his nephews are flying down,
and they always bring cool weather.
Oh? Which nephews?
Simka, who's 14, and little Boris, who's five.
Well, that's wonderful.
Though children can make you even hotter
when they're crawling all over you.
Maybe I should visit them.
No, they don't want visitors.
I'm sorry, um, I have to get back to work.
It's very busy right now. Goodbye.
They're dropping sand and boron on the fire.
It's what I would do.
Yes, I'm sure it is.
Where are you going?
Chernobyl.
It's been smooth. Twenty drops.
What?
There are 50,000 people in this city.
Professor Ilyin, who's also on the commission,
says the radiation isn't high enough to evacuate.
Ilyin isn't a physicist.
Well, he's a medical doctor. If he says it's safe, it's safe.
- Not if they stay here. - We're staying here.
Yes, we are, and we'll be dead in five years.
I'm sorry, I...
I'm sorry.
Shcherbina.
Thank you.
A nuclear plant in Sweden has detected radiation
and identified it as a byproduct of our fuel.
The Americans took satellite photos.
The reactor building, the smoke, the fire.
The whole world knows.
The wind has been blowing toward Germany.
They're not letting children play outside...
in Frankfurt.
Want a smoke?
There has been a nuclear accident in the Soviet Union
and the Soviets have admitted that it happened.
The Soviet version is this:
One of the atomic reactors
at the Chernobyl Atomic Power Plant near the city of Kiev
was damaged, and there is speculation in Moscow
that people were injured and may have died.
The Soviets may have been fairly quick to acknowledge the accident
because evidence in the form of mild nuclear radiation
had already reached beyond the Soviet borders to Scandinavia.
I said turn around. This is a restricted zone.
I'm from the Byelorussian Institute for Nuclear Energy.
Do you have permission?
Listen to me, I need to speak to someone urgently.
Turn around right now, or I'll arrest you.
If you arrest me, you should take me
to the highest possible authority.
We have to start a radiological survey.
Sector by sector, on foot, dosimeters in hand.
Are you all right?
Of course.
Comrades...
The guards arrested this woman at the south checkpoint.
- I'd have put her in a cell... - But he thought you should know that I know.
I know that your reactor core is exposed.
I know the graphite is on fire, the fuel is melting,
and you're dropping sand and boron on it,
which you probably thought was smart, but you've made a mistake.
Ulana Yuriyvna Khomyuk, Chief Physicist,
Byelorussian Institute for Nuclear Energy.
And you are Valery Alexeyevich Legasov?
Smothering the core will put the fire out,
but the temperature will eventually increase...
Believe me, I'm perfectly aware.
But I estimate at least a month
before it melts through the lower concrete pad,
- which gives us time... - No, you don't have a month.
You have approximately two days.
Yes, the fuel would take a month
to reach the concrete pad here.
But first... it's going to burn through
the biological shield here by Tuesday.
And when it does, it's going to hit these tanks...
bubbler pools, reservoirs...
Reservoirs for the ECS. I understand your concern,
but I confirmed it with plant personnel.
- The tanks are nearly empty. - No, they were nearly empty.
Each of these points here, here, and here
all drain to the bubbler pools.
I'm guessing that every pipe in the building ruptured.
And then there are those fire engines that I saw on the way in.
The fire hoses are still connected.
They've been gushing water into the structure this whole time.
The tanks are full.
I have ten minutes, then I'm back on the phone
apologizing to our friends,
apologizing to our enemies.
Our power comes from the perception of our power.
Do you understand the damage this has done?
Do you understand what's at stake?
Boris.
Professor Legasov will deliver our briefing.
There is some good news.
The air drops are working to douse the fire.
There's been a reduction in radionuclide emissions,
but the fire will not be extinguished
for at least another two weeks.
There is also an additional problem.
Nuclear fuel doesn't turn cold
simply because it is not on fire.
In fact, the temperature will likely rise
as a result of the blanket of sand we've dropped.
The uranium will melt the sand,
creating a kind of lava
which will begin to melt down through the shield below.
You have made lava?
I anticipated this.
I believed there was time to reinforce
this lower concrete pad
before the lava reached the earth
and contaminated the groundwater.
But as it turned out, I was worried about the wrong thing.
Uh, um...
It was my understanding that these large water tanks
under the reactor were essentially empty.
This is Ulana Khomyuk of the Byelorussian Institute.
Thanks to her insight, we are now aware
that the tanks are, in fact, full.
Of water. Why is that a problem, professor?
When the lava enters these tanks,
it will instantly superheat and vaporize
approximately 7,000 cubic meters of water,
causing a significant thermal explosion.
How significant?
We estimate between two and four megatons.
Everything within a 30-kilometer radius
will be completely destroyed,
including the three remaining reactors at Chernobyl.
The entirety of the radioactive material in all of the cores
will be ejected at force
and dispersed by a massive shock wave,
which will extend approximately 200 kilometers
and likely be fatal to the entire population of Kiev
as well as a portion of Minsk.
The release of radiation will be severe
and will impact all of Soviet Ukraine,
Latvia, Lithuania, Byelorussia,
as well as Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary,
Romania, and most of East Germany.
What do you mean "impact"?
For much of the area, a nearly permanent disruption
of the food and water supply,
a steep increase in the rates of cancer and birth defects.
I don't know how many deaths there will be, but many.
For Byelorussia and the Ukraine,
"impact" means completely uninhabitable
for a minimum of 100 years.
There are more than 50 million people
living in Byelorussia and Ukraine.
Sixty, yes.
And how long before this happens?
Approximately 48 to 72 hours.
But we may have a solution.
We can pump the water from the tanks.
Unfortunately, the tanks are sealed shut by a sluice gate,
and the gate can only be opened manually
from within the duct system itself.
So we need to find three plant workers
who know the facility well enough
to enter the basement here,
find their way through all these duct ways,
get to the sluice gate valve here,
and give us the access we need to pump out the tanks.
Of course, we will need your permission.
My permission for what?
Uh, the water in these ducts,
the level of radioactive contamination...
They'll likely be dead in a week.
We're asking for your permission to kill three men.
Well...
Comrade Legasov...
all victories inevitably come at a cost.
And open the sluice gate valve... here.
The valve will be difficult to operate,
so we'll need three men
who will need to know the basement layout.
And, of course, any volunteers will be rewarded.
A yearly stipend of 400 rubles.
And, uh, for those of you working in reactors one and two, promotions.
Why are reactors one and two still operating at all?
My friend was a security guard that night,
and, uh, she's now dying.
And we've all heard about the firemen.
And now you want us to swim underneath a burning reactor?
Do you even know how contaminated it is?
I... I don't have an exact number.
You don't need an exact number to know if it'll kill us.
But you can't even tell us that.
Why should we do this? For what, 400 rubles?
You'll do it because it must be done.
You'll do it because nobody else can.
And if you don't, millions will die.
If you tell me that's not enough, I won't believe you.
This is what has always set our people apart.
A thousand years of sacrifice in our veins.
And every generation must know its own suffering.
I spit on the people who did this,
and I curse the price I have to pay.
But I'm making my peace with it,
and now you make yours.
And go into that water.
Because it must be done.
Ananenko.
Bezpalov.
Baranov.
Where are you going?
Chernobyl.
Ignatenko, fire and rescue unit. I need to find him!
Moscow. Hospital number six.
Are you here because of the fire?
Anything we should be worried about?
No.
It cannot go over the core.
The nuclear plant in Sweden has detected radiation.
At least evacuate Pripyat.
When the lava enters these tanks,
it will instantly superheat,
causing a significant thermal explosion.
And how long before this happens?
Approximately 48 to 72 hours,
but we may have a solution.
- Synced and corrected by VitoSilans - -- www.Addic7ed.com --
Is it possible that the water has already killed them?
Yes.
Then what?
If it doesn't work?
Get them in the truck.
Get the hoses in! Start pumping!
Uh, I'm here to see my husband, Vasily Ignatenko.
He's a firefighter from Chernobyl. I have permission.
Chernobyl? I'm sorry, no visitors.
Well, but Major Burov told me,
- he said... - No exceptions.
Please. I've come all the way from Kievskaya Oblast.
Excuse me.
Excuse me, excuse me.
Who are you? What are you doing here?
- I have a pass. - You can't be here. It's not safe.
I am here to see my husband.
Vasily Ignatenko.
He's a firefighter from Chernobyl.
I know who Ignatenko is, but you can't.
I have permission. I-I've...
You can see him for 30 minutes, not a minute more.
And you cannot touch him in any way. Do you understand?
- Yeah. - Room 15.
Thank you.
- You're not pregnant, are you? - No.
I won't have to give that to you.
There they are.
No, wait, wait, wait. I haven't finished yet.
No, he hasn't.
Yeah, that's good.
Yeah, better.
Look who the cat dragged in.
What did I tell you?
There's no hiding from you, is there?
Easy, easy. It's okay.
We're all okay. Yeah, we're okay.
How, how, how did this happen? Who gave them the idea?
- Are you suggesting I did? - Someone did.
Someone decided that the evacuation zone
should be 30 kilometers, when we know, here,
Cesium-137 in the Gomel district.
- That's 200 kilometers away! - It was decided.
- Based on what? - I don't know!
Forgive me. Maybe I've just spent too much time in my lab.
Or maybe I'm just stupid.
Is this really the way it all works?
An uninformed, arbitrary decision
that will cost who knows how many lives
made by some apparatchik, some career party man?
I'm a career party man.
You should watch your tone, Comrade Legasov.
Comrades...
We have visual confirmation that the fire is nearly extinguished.
There has also been a reduction in iodine 131
and cesium-137 emissions.
Good. Yes?
But the temperature is rising.
And, uh...
There's a spike in zirconium-95.
It's from the cladding on the fuel rods.
Meaning what?
The meltdown has begun.
Get it off me!
Get it off me!
Stop moving!
Get off him! You're hurting him!
- You can't be in here. - What's happening to him?
Get out!
You can't be in here!
Yes?
Comrade Shcherbina is on the phone.
Put him through.
Well?
The fire's nearly out.
The bubbler tanks are being drained.
We have successfully eliminated the risk of a thermal explosion.
And?
The situation inside the core
is deteriorating faster than anticipated.
The concrete pad will last for six to eight weeks,
but after that, Legasov estimates a 50% chance
that the fuel will breach the pad
and melt down into the groundwater itself.
And where does this groundwater go?
The Pripyat River,
which feeds into the Dnieper.
The primary water supply for approximately 50 million people,
not to mention crops and livestock,
would be... unusable.
We're recommending we install a heat exchanger under the pad
to lower to core temperature and halt the meltdown.
And in order to do that, I'm told that we will need...
all of the liquid nitrogen in the Soviet Union.
- All right. - Yeah, and of course, we'll also need...
Whatever you need, you have it.
- That should be clear by now. - Yes.
- Anything else? - No, no, no. Thank you.
Yes. I'd like to address the 30-kilometer exclusion zone.
Wait, what? Professor Legasov, is that you?
What exclusion zone?
Minor details, General Secretary.
Um, Premier Ryzhkov has determined that...
If he determined, then he determined.
Look, Professor Legasov,
you are there for one reason only.
Do you understand? To make this stop.
I don't want questions.
I want to know when this will be over.
If you mean when will Chernobyl be completely safe,
the half-life of plutonium-239 is 24,000 years.
So perhaps we should just say, "Not within our lifetimes."
I think you and I should take a walk.
It's late. I'm tired.
We're taking a walk.
Was it it you want? An apology?
Not gonna sit back and...
What will happen to our boys?
Which boys? The divers?
The divers, the firefighters, the men in the control room.
What does the radiation do to them precisely?
At the levels some of them were exposed?
Ionizing radiation tears the cellular structure apart.
The skin blisters, turns red, then black.
This is followed by a latency period.
The immediate effects subside.
The patient appears to be recovering.
Healthy, even. But they aren't.
This usually only lasts for a day or two.
Continue.
Then the cellular damage begins to manifest.
The bone marrow dies, the immune system fails,
the organs and soft tissue begin to decompose.
The arteries and veins spill open like sieves,
to the point where you can't even administer morphine
for the pain, which is... unimaginable.
And then three days to three weeks, you are dead.
That is what will happen to those boys.
And what about us?
Well, we've...
We've gotten a steady dose, but not as much of it.
Not strong enough to kill the cells,
but consistent enough to damage our DNA.
So, in time... cancer.
Or aplastic anemia. Either way, fatal.
Well...
in a sense, it would seem we've gotten off easy then, Valery.
I've seen them before.
Now you know why I wanted to take a walk.
We can presume the work site is bugged.
And our rooms, even our bathrooms.
They've been here the whole time.
Of course they've been here the whole time.
But if we're seeing them out in the open now,
it's because they want us to know.
You've seen that?
The fuel is melting faster than we expected.
I know. I have a plan.
Heat exchanger, I hope.
Yes.
There's something I've wanted to ask you, comrade,
but I see you're already asking yourself the same question.
Why did it explode?
I've worked the numbers over and over,
presuming the worst possible conditions in an RBMK reactor.
And I always get the same answer.
Which is?
It's not possible.
And yet...
You're not going to solve this here.
Not on paper.
Everyone who was in the control room,
Dyatlov, Akimov, Toptunov,
they're all in Moscow, Hospital Number 6.
We need to find out exactly what happened that night,
moment by moment, decision by decision.
Go now while they're still alive.
Talk to them.
Because if we don't find out how this happened,
it will happen again.
And, Khomyuk...
be careful.
Well, fuck you!
Hey, here's one, here's one.
What's as big as a house,
burns 20 liters of fuel every hour,
puts out a shit-load of smoke and noise,
and cuts an apple into three pieces?
A Soviet machine made to cut apples into four pieces!
- Who's in charge here? - I'm the crew chief.
I am Shadov, minister of coal industries.
We know who you are.
How many men do you have?
On this shift, 45 here, a hundred in total.
I need all 100 men to gather their equipment and get in the trucks.
Do you? To where?
That's classified.
Come on, then.
Start shooting.
You haven't got enough bullets for all of us.
Kill as many as you can, whoever's left,
they'll beat the living piss out of each of you.
- You can't talk to us like that! - Shut the fuck up!
This is Tula. This is our mine.
We don't leave unless we know why.
You're going to Chernobyl.
Do you know what's happened there?
We dig up coal, not bodies.
The reactor fuel is going to sink into the ground
and poison the water from Kiev to the Black Sea.
All of it.
Forever, they say.
They want you to stop that from happening.
And how are we supposed to do that?
They didn't tell me, because I don't need to know.
Do you need to know, or have you heard enough?
Now you look like the minister of coal.
Vasya?
Vasya?
No, no, no.
They told you no touching.
It's not safe.
They touch you.
If it's safe for them, it's safe for me.
Where are the others?
They took them to a special room.
They won't tell me where.
Will you open the curtains?
- Hmm? - Open the curtains.
Please, tell me what you see outside.
Tell me everything.
I can see the Red Square.
And...
the Kremlin.
Spasskaya Tower, the Mausoleum.
You see St. Basil's?
Yeah.
Yes, it's beautiful.
I told you.
I told you I'd show you Moscow, remember?
- Huh? - Yeah. Yes.
Thank you.
I'm not eating that. It's shit.
Get me something else.
I'm not a nurse, Comrade Dyatlov.
I'm a nuclear physicist.
Well, then, Comrade Nuclear Physicist...
unless you happen to have a butter and caviar sandwich on you,
you can get the fuck out of my room.
What?
I'm not good at this, Boris.
The lying.
Have you ever spent time with miners?
No.
My advice: tell the truth.
These men work in the dark. They see everything.
Andrei Glukhov, crew chief.
Do these work?
To an extent.
Of course.
So what's the job?
We need to install a liquid nitrogen heat exchanger
underneath this concrete pad.
There's no way to approach from the interior of the building,
so you have to get at it from underground.
- And what's above the pad? - The core of the nuclear reactor,
which is melting down.
What? Like...
Essentially.
Is it gonna fall on top of us?
Not if you're done within six weeks.
Dimensions?
Break ground here,
dig a tunnel 150 meters to here,
excavate a space 30 by 30 meters
for the heat exchanger.
And because we need to keep disruption of the ground above to a minimum,
you can't use any heavy machinery.
It has to be done by hand.
Then I need more men.
Four hundred at least.
We'll have to work around the clock.
How deep do you want this tunnel? Six meters?
- Twelve. - Twelve? Why?
For your protection.
At that depth, you'll be shielded from much of the radiation.
The entrance to the tunnel won't be 12 meters below ground.
No.
And we're not 12 meters below ground now.
No. We're not.
We have some equipment here on site.
More will arrive by midnight.
You can start in the morning.
No. We start now.
I don't want my men here one more second than they need to be.
If these worked, you'd be wearing them.
Are they all like that?
They're all like that.
Yes?
- What's it up to? - Uh, 50 degrees.
Fuck!
Hey!
Hey you!
- We need fans. - For what purpose?
What do you mean, "For what purpose?"
To dig your fucking tunnel, that's why.
- Who's talking to you? - Whoa, whoa. Comrades.
It's 50 degrees down there.
We can't breathe without the masks,
we can't breathe with the masks.
It's like a fucking oven. We need ventilation.
Fans will put dust in the air, the dust will go in your lungs.
I've been breathing dust in my lungs for 20 years.
- Not this dust. - I'm sorry.
For your own good, no fans.
My name is Ulana Khomyuk.
I'm a nuclear physicist with the Chernobyl Commission.
I want you to tell me everything that happened
on the night of the accident.
Is that all right?
Yes.
I want to tell.
All right.
Your official title was?
My name is Leonid Fedorovych Toptunov.
I am the senior reactor control chief engineer
at Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant.
Senior engineer?
How old are you?
I'm 25.
Lyusya? Lyusya?
Yes, I'm here, I'm here. I'm...
Have you been here this whole time?
No one said I should leave.
I did.
Thirty minutes, I said!
Well, where have you been? When he's in pain?
When his sores stick to his gown?
When he soils himself five times a night?
I've been looking after him. Where have you been?
I've been In the north and west wing,
where there are dozens of patients from Chernobyl exactly like him.
- It isn't safe for you here. - He's my husband.
Not anymore.
He's something else now. Do you understand?
He's dangerous to you.
He's burned.
Go home.
Please.
It won't take much longer. I, uh...
I don't want him to die alone.
Stay on the other side of the plastic.
Or I'll have you removed by security.
- Lyusya? - Yes, my love.
Is it day?
No, it's nighttime now.
I think I had a dream,
it's just gone.
Vasya.
We're going to have a baby.
The fire's out.
It's out, Valera.
The miners are making incredible progress.
They say the whole job will be finished in four weeks.
Four weeks.
Can you believe that?
I know the job isn't over.
But it's the beginning of the end.
I'm sorry to bother you, Deputy Minister, but...
it is the miners.
What?
You wouldn't give us fans, it's too hot for clothes.
So we're digging the old way. This is how our fathers mined.
We're still wearing the fucking hats.
What do you want?
You're not as protected now.
Are you telling me it will make a difference?
When this is over,
will they be looked after?
I don't know.
You don't know.
So the power level jumped from 200 to 400 megawatts?
Yes.
Very fast.
Why didn't you initiate an emergency shutdown?
Why didn't you press the AZ-5 button?
We did.
I reported the increase to Akimov,
and he pressed the button.
Leonid, that's... that's not possible.
He did.
I s-swear.
I saw him do it.
And that's when it exploded.
What?
- Which room is Akimov? - Twenty-seven.
I pressed it... before the explosion.
Before.
But why?
Why would that happen?
I shut it down. I pressed AZ-5.
Thank you, Comrade Akimov.
I did everything right.
I did everything right.
Get out.
Get out. Get out of here.
Let me go! Let me go!
Stop it! Stop it!
You let her in that room? Inside the plastic, touching him?
- Did you know she's pregnant? - It's not true!
What have you done?
What kind of place is this? Where is her protection?
- Do you have any idea what you're dealing with? - Of course I do.
- Please, I do not... - No.
- People are going to hear about this. - Wait.
People are going to hear. Do you understand?
Everyone is going to hear.
What is everyone gonna hear?
I am with the official Chernobyl Commission,
and I've been authorized by Valery Legasov.
- You can check this. My name is Ulana... - We know who you are.
What is everyone gonna hear?
You have your notes?
Yes.
Khomyuk was arrested last night.
What? Why?
I don't know.
- Was it...? - Of course it was.
I'm working on it.
- Boris... - I'm working on it.
What more do you want from me?
Fix your tie.
They'll see you now.
After thousands of sorties, our brave helicopter crews
successfully extinguished the fire.
The miners are working heroically to ensure
that the fuel does not reach the groundwater.
And furthermore, there is no longer
a threat of additional explosion.
The Soviet people have faced the challenge and risen to the task,
and they and everyone in this room are to be commended.
Lastly, Professor Legasov and I have been vigilant
to protect the security interests of the State.
And since the unfortunate release of information
directly following the accident,
we believe that there has been no further lapse.
Comrade Charkov,
we hope we have lived up to the highest standards of the KGB.
You have.
Thank you.
Professor Legasov will now speak about
the work that remains.
Thank you.
Deputy Chairman Shcherbina has given you the good news,
and it is good.
The immediate danger is over.
Now, I'm afraid, a long war must begin.
There is an enormous amount of radioactive debris
and contamination spread out across a zone
of approximately 2600 square kilometers.
This entire region must be completely evacuated.
We must go to every town, every village to ensure this.
And all animals still surviving within the zone,
whether domesticated or wild,
must be presumed contaminated and will have to be destroyed
to prevent the spread of radiation and disease.
In the immediate area surrounding Chernobyl,
uh, every rock, every tree, the very ground itself,
has absorbed a dangerous amount of radionuclides,
which will be carried by the wind and the rain if left exposed.
So we will have to raze entire forests.
We will have to rip up the top layer of earth
and bury it under itself,
approximately, 100 square kilometers.
Um, and finally, we will need to construct
a containment structure around the power plant itself,
which will, of course, still be extremely...
There will be deaths.
What amount of time,
and how many men do you require?
We expect this liquidation effort to take three years
and approximately 750,000 men,
including a number of doctors and structural engineers.
How many deaths?
Thousands.
Perhaps tens of thousands.
Begin at once.
- Comrade Charkov. - Valery!
Yes, Professor?
My associate was arrested last night.
Oh?
I mean no disrespect, but I was wondering if you could tell me why.
I assure you, I don't know who you're talking about.
She was arrested by the KGB.
You are the first deputy chairman of the KGB.
I am.
That's why I don't have to bother with arresting people anymore.
But you are bothering with having us followed.
I think the deputy chairman is busy.
No, no. It's perfectly understandable.
Comrade, I know you've heard the stories about us.
When I hear them, even I am shocked.
But we are not what people say.
Yes, people are following you.
People are following those people.
You see them?
They follow me.
The KGB is a circle of accountability.
Nothing more.
You know the work we're doing here.
- You really don't trust us? - Of course I do.
But you know the old Russian proverb:
"Trust but verify."
And the Americans think that Ronald Reagan thought that up.
Can you imagine?
It was very nice speaking with you.
I need her.
So you will be accountable for her?
Then it's done.
- Her name is... - I know who she is.
Good day, Professor.
No, that went surprisingly well.
You came off like a naive idiot.
And naive idiots are not a threat.
I'll come back when the paperwork is complete.
- Are you all right? - They didn't hurt me.
They let a pregnant woman into a room with a...
It doesn't matter.
They were stupid. I was stupid.
Dyatlov won't talk to me.
Akimov, yes, Toptunov, yes, but...
Valery,
Akimov...
his face was gone.
You want to stop?
Is that a choice I even have?
Do you think the fuel will actually melt through the concrete pad?
I don't know. A 40% chance maybe.
I said 50.
Either way, the numbers mean the same thing:
"Maybe."
Maybe the core will melt through to the groundwater.
Maybe the miners who I've told to dig under the reactor
will save millions of lives.
Maybe I'm killing them for nothing.
I don't want to do this anymore.
I want to stop.
But I can't.
I don't think you have a choice any more than I do.
I think, despite the stupidity,
the lies, even this...
you are compelled.
The problem has been assigned, and you will stop at nothing
until you find an answer.
Because that is who you are.
A lunatic, then.
A scientist.
Did you know that they were running a safety test?
- Yeah. - There's something else.
Akimov says they shut the reactor down,
and Toptunov confirms it.
- They pressed AZ-5. - Apparently not soon enough.
No.
They say Akimov pressed AZ-5,
and then the reactor exploded.
If it had been just one of them, I would have put it under
faulty memory or delusion even,
but they both agreed. They were adamant.
Comrade?
- Do you think it's possible? - I think it makes no sense.
I think it's what I would say if I was trying to cover my own mistakes.
But?
I believed them.
Then you should pursue it.
We have to pursue every possibility,
no matter how unlikely,
no matter what or who's to blame.
I'll go back to the hospital and reinterview Akimov and Toptunov.
If they're still awake.
They're not.
Khomyuk.
To hell with our lives.
Someone has to start telling the truth.
You think the right question will get you the truth?
I know they're listening!
There is no truth.
Why didn't you press the AZ-5 button?
We did. And that's when it exploded.
I don't want my men here one more second
than they need to be.
If these worked, you'd be wearing them.
Vasily...
We're gonna have a baby.
Do you have any idea what you're dealing with?
People are going to hear.
What is everyone gonna hear?
We have to pursue every possibility,
no matter who is to blame.
This entire region must be completely evacuated.
How many men do you require?
Approximately 750,000 men.
It's time to go.
Did you hear me?
This is an evacuation. You understand?
You have to come with me.
Why?
Because they told me, so now I'm telling you.
Everyone in this village, everyone.
It's not safe here. There's radiation in the air.
What's wrong with you?
Do you know how old I am?
I don't know. Old.
I'm 82.
I've lived here my whole life.
Right here, that house, this place.
What do I care about safe?
I have a job. Don't cause trouble.
Trouble?
You're not the first soldier to stand here with a gun.
When I was 12, the revolution came.
Czar's men. Then Bolsheviks.
Boys like you marching in lines.
They told us to leave. No.
Then there was Stalin and his famine,
the Holodomor.
My parents died. Two of my sisters died.
They told the rest of us to leave.
No.
Then the Great War.
German boys. Russian boys.
More soldiers, more famine, more bodies.
My brothers never came home.
But I stayed, and I'm still here.
After all that I have seen...
so I should leave now,
because of something I cannot see at all?
No.
Just one moment!
It's time to go.
Please stand up now.
This is your last warning.
It's time to go.
Come on.
Point four.
Point six.
Fifteen.
Legasov.
I'll meet him there.
The atom is a humbling thing.
It's not humbling, it's humiliating.
Why is the core still exposed to the air?
Why have we not already covered it up?
We want to, but we can't get close enough.
The debris on the roof is graphite from the core itself.
Until we can push it off the roof back into the reactor,
it'll kill anyone who gets near it.
You can see the roof is in three levels.
We've named them... the small one here is Katya.
One thousand roentgen per hour.
Presume two hours of exposure is fatal.
The one on the side... Nina.
Two thousand roentgen. One hour, fatal.
We used remote-controlled bulldozers in Afghanistan.
Too heavy. They'd fall right through.
- So then...? - Moon rovers.
Lunokhod STR-1's. They're light.
And if we line them with lead, they can withstand the radiation.
We couldn't put a man on the moon.
At least we can keep a man off a roof.
That is the most important thing, General.
Under no circumstances can men go up there.
Robots only.
What about this large section here?
Masha.
Twelve thousand roentgen.
If you were to stand there in full
protective gear head-to-toe for two minutes,
your life expectancy would be cut in half.
By three minutes, you're dead within months.
Even our lunar rovers won't work on Masha.
That amount of gamma radiation penetrates everything.
The particles literally shred
the circuits in microchips apart.
If it's more complicated than a light switch,
Masha will destroy it.
It would be fair to say that
that piece of roof is the most dangerous place on Earth.
So... what do we do?
That's what we wanted to ask you.
Tent 181?
It's all right. It's free.
It's a little early.
Bacho.
Pavel.
- Yeah? - Mm.
What unit were you in?
Uh, they had me in motor pool in Kiev,
- but then they... - Not this bullshit.
In Afghanistan.
Oh, um, I wasn't in Afghanistan.
I'm not in the military.
They're running out of men.
Showers. Food.
Those guys, they dig up the ground.
Those guys, they cut down trees.
Those guys, they evacuate people, I think,
like villagers.
What about them?
I don't know them. Fuck them.
Janek!
- What do you want? - Give me an egg basket.
- No, I've only got the one... - Give me the fucking basket!
He's with me, you understand?
Nobody fucks with him.
We make these from lead scrap.
- Put it on under your balls. - Now?
No, no. You can wait until the radiation gives you a cunt.
Yes, now.
Over your clothes. Fucking shit.
- You ever go hunting? - No.
Well... today's your lucky day.
You, me,
that ugly Armenian in the tent, Garo, we do animal control.
Animal control?
Yeah, they're radioactive,
so they have to go.
But it's not hard. They're mostly pets.
They're happy to see you. They run right up to you.
Bang!
You load the bodies on the truck,
dump them in a pit, bury them in concrete.
And then we drink.
As much vodka as you want, plus a thousand rubles.
Let's go get you a gun.
Yes?
I need to see the following documents.
They're listed as permission only.
I'm working for the Central Committee.
Comrade?
She can have that one.
Thank you, Comrade.
All clear.
Bring up the cameras.
- Signal? - Acceptable.
Running onboard diagnostics.
Tell me when we're ready to move it.
To think that's what we put on the moon.
Well, not that one.
I know not that one.
This rover was in storage. They can build two more.
That should cover Nina and Katya.
And Masha?
The Central Committee have informed me
that they may have found something
that could work up there. From the outside.
American?
Of course not.
It's a German police robot.
West German, so, as you can imagine,
that wasn't an easy conversation to have.
Diagnostics complete.
Ready to engage main power and motor.
Begin.
Can we move it?
Valery, what's that? A smile?
I see your condition has improved, Comrade Dyatlov.
No. Leave.
I need your help.
Akimov initiated AZ-5.
- When you gave the order... - Order? What order?
Toptunov called it out, Akimov pressed it.
It was the only good decision they made.
Incompetent morons.
Can you confirm that the reactor exploded
after they attempted to shut it down?
How do I even know it exploded, huh?
I found this in the state archive.
Written in 1976.
It's about the operation of RBMK reactors under extreme conditions.
So?
The names of the authors have been redacted,
and two pages have been removed.
Well, the State must protect its secrets, Comrade.
Do you dare suggest otherwise?
They made a mistake.
They didn't redact the table of contents.
The missing pages apparently refer
to a positive void coefficient and AZ-5.
Does that mean anything to you?
What are you after here? Why are you asking me this?
You worked with the reactor. You know it better than I do.
So everything's my fault, then?
Is that what this is?
I'm not here to blame you.
I'm here to find out what happened.
And whether you realize it or not,
I'm your best chance to avoid a bullet.
Can you help me or not?
I have no idea what would've gone here.
Void coefficients have nothing to do with AZ-5.
There. Now you can go.
- You're not even curious? - What for?
You think the right question will get you the truth?
There is no truth.
Ask the bosses whatever you want and you'll get the lie.
And I will get the bullet.
I only have two rules.
One.
Don't point this gun at me. That's easy, right?
You can point it at this piece of shit.
I don't give a fuck. Never me.
Two.
If you hit an animal and it doesn't die,
keep shooting until it does.
Don't let them suffer, or I'll kill you.
Understand?
I mean it.
I've killed a lot of people.
Good. Then we're ready.
Once we start, they'll run inside where they feel safe.
So we go door-to-door.
Okay?
Good.
Hey!
Do your job. Door-to-door.
Go. Go.
Go away. Go!
Don't let them suffer.
Sorry. Sorry.
You're dragging that to the truck.
You gonna eat?
Drink.
Again.
Look...
This happens to everyone their first time.
Normally when you kill a man.
But for you, a dog.
So what? There's no shame in it.
You remember your first time, Garo?
My first time... Afghanistan.
We were moving through a house,
and suddenly a man was there and I shot him in the stomach.
Yeah, that's a real war story.
They're never any good stories like in the movies.
They're shit.
A man was there... boom, stomach.
I was so scared, I didn't pull the trigger again
for the rest of the day.
I thought, "Well, that's it, Bacho.
You put a bullet in someone.
You're not you anymore.
You'll never be you again."
But then you wake up the next morning,
and you're still you.
And you realize...
that was you all along.
You just didn't know.
The happiness of all mankind.
What?
"Our goal is the happiness of all mankind."
Yeah.
I'm happy.
I'm happy every day.
All right. Back to work.
Come on.
It's here.
All right.
Get over.
Right. Hang on.
Easy now. Careful.
Hold it!
Joker.
It's what the Germans named it: "Joker."
- Is it ready? - It's ready.
Good signal.
Cameras.
Motors.
Motors, good. Signals, good.
All right, let's take this easy.
Forward one meter, reverse one meter.
Forward one.
Germans.
Reverse one.
Did you lose the signal?
It's not the signal. It's the vehicle.
It's dead.
Shit.
Of course I know they're listening!
I want them to hear! I want them to hear it all!
Do you know what we're doing here?!
Tell those geniuses what they have done!
I don't give a fuck!
Tell them! Go tell them! Ryzhkov!
Go tell them he's a joke!
Tell fucking Gorbachev!
Tell them!
The official position of the State
is that a global nuclear catastrophe
is not possible in the Soviet Union.
They told the Germans that the highest detected level of radiation
was 2,000 roentgen.
They gave them the propaganda number.
That robot was never going to work.
We need a new phone.
What if we don't clear it?
We have to clear it.
If we don't clear the roof, we can't build a cover over it.
If we can't cover it, that's 12,000 roentgen.
That's nearly twice the radiation from the Hiroshima bomb.
- Every hour, hour after... - I know, I know, I know.
What about lead?
We could... I don't know.
We could melt it and pour it from above, like a coating.
First of all, we've already used most of the lead we had...
There's lead sheeting around the instruments
in the other reactor buildings.
The soldiers are stripping it for their armor.
Are you serious?
Even if, we're still talking about
boiling metal in a helicopter.
And it's lead, Boris, it'll weight a ton.
What if we shoot the graphite into the hole?
We've got high-caliber bullets, exploding bullets.
They wouldn't just ricochet, they'd push...
You wanna shoot exploding bullets
at an exposed nuclear reactor?
- Well... - No, no.
Let's go light that roof back on fire.
It was so easy to put out the first time.
What are we talking about here?
We need another robot.
One that can withstand the radiation.
I've asked. There is nothing.
The Americans?
If the Americans had that kind of technology,
do you really think they'd give it to us?
And even if they would, the Central Committee will never stoop to ask.
You know it, I know it.
There are no robots.
Biorobots.
What was that?
We use biorobots.
Men.
A lot today.
Where do they get their food?
They eat the chickens.
Then they eat each other.
Door-to-door.
Pavel?
Pavel!
You don't hear me? I'm talking to you.
Fuck.
Just go outside.
Go.
Comrade soldiers,
the Soviet people have had enough of this accident.
They want us to clean this up,
and we have entrusted you with this serious task.
Because of the nature of the working area,
you will each have no more than 90 seconds to solve this problem.
Listen carefully to each of my instructions,
and do exactly as you have been told.
This is for your own safety and the safety of your comrades.
You will enter Reactor Building Three,
climb the stairs but do not immediately proceed to the roof.
When you get to the top, wait inside,
behind the entrance to the roof and catch your breath.
You will need it for what comes next.
This is the working area. We must clear the graphite.
Some of it is in blocks, weighing approximately 40 to 50 kilograms.
They all must be thrown over the edge here.
Watch your comrades moving fast from this opening,
then turning to the left,
and entering the workspace here.
Take care not to stumble.
There's a hole in the roof. Take care not to fall.
You will need to move quickly, and you will need to move carefully.
Do you understand your mission as I have described it?
Yes, Comrade General.
These are the most important 90 seconds of your lives.
Commit your task to memory, then do your job.
It's time to go. After 90 seconds, I will ring a bell.
When you hear it, return immediately,
drop your shovels in the bin,
and proceed down the hallway for decontamination.
Above all, while on the roof,
throw your debris over the rail.
Do not look over the rail. Is that clear?
Very well.
On my mark. Ready. Go.
Comrade soldier.
You're done.
Time to go.
Oh! Your glove!
Mommy! Mommy!
I'm sorry for all this.
But we needed to speak to you somewhere without...
They're going to put Dyatlov on trial,
and Bryukhanov and Fomin.
We're going to be asked to give expert testimony,
all three of us.
But that's... Before that happens...
The Central Committee is sending Legasov to Vienna.
It's the headquarters of the International...
Atomic Energy Agency. Yeah, I know what's in Vienna.
What are they asking you to do?
Tell the world what happened.
Well, then you better know what happened.
I've constructed a timeline,
minute by minute.
Second by second in some places.
Every decision, every button push,
every turn of a switch.
And? Are they guilty?
Yes.
Of gross incompetence, violation of safety regulations,
recklessness beyond belief.
But the explosion? I'm not sure.
What do you mean you're not sure?
I've analyzed the data.
Toptunov was telling the truth.
They shut the reactor down, and then it exploded.
I think this article my have the answer,
but two pages have been removed.
You've seen this before.
Please, believe me when I tell you that
I had no idea it could cause an explosion.
- None of us knew. - None of you knew what?
In 1975, in an RBMK reactor in Leningrad,
a fuel channel ruptured.
The operators pressed AZ-5,
but instead of the power going down immediately,
for a brief moment it went up.
How is that possible?
Well, this was the very question posed
by a colleague of mine named Volkov.
He's the one who wrote this article.
When an RBMK reactor runs at low power, it's notoriously unstable.
Prone to swings in reactivity.
Under normal circumstances,
the control rods can compensate for that.
Under normal circumstances.
The Chernobyl staff stalled the reactor during the test.
They pulled almost all the control rods out
to bring the power back up.
This is what Volkov learned from Leningrad.
If the boron control rods
are completely withdrawn from the reactor,
when they're put back in,
the first thing that enters the core isn't boron.
It's graphite.
The control rods have graphite tips
that displace water and steam.
So the reactivity doesn't go down.
It goes up dramatically.
Why on Earth would they press that button?
They didn't know.
Volkov warned the Kremlin,
ten years ago.
But there could be no doubt
about the supremacy of the Soviet nuclear industry.
Ah.
The KGB classified it as a state secret.
When I saw the reactor blown open,
I still didn't think it could be this flaw in AZ-5.
Because the flaw will not lead to an explosion
unless the operators have pushed the reactor to the edge of disaster.
- So it is their fault? - Yes.
But not only their fault.
No.
Is that what you're going to say in Vienna?
You can't possibly be that naive.
There are 16 RBMK reactors
running in the Soviet Union right now.
We have to fix them.
The only way to do that is to go public,
force the Central Committee to take action.
What you're proposing is that Legasov humiliate a nation
that is obsessed with not being humiliated.
We can make a deal with the KGB.
You'll leave this information out in Vienna,
and they quietly let us fix the remaining reactors.
A deal with the KGB?
And I'm "naive."
They'll go after your family, they'll go after your friends.
You have a chance to talk to the world, Valery.
If that chance was mine...
But it isn't, is it?
I've know braver souls than you, Khomyuk.
Men who had their moment and did nothing.
Because when it's your life and the lives of everyone you love,
your moral conviction doesn't mean anything.
It leaves you.
And all you want at that moment is not to be shot.
Do you know the name Vasily Ignatenko?
No.
He was a fireman.
He died two weeks after the accident.
I've been looking in on his widow.
She gave birth.
A girl.
The baby lived for four hours.
They said the radiation would have killed the mother,
but the baby absorbed it instead.
Her baby.
We live in a country
where children have to die to save their mothers.
To hell with your deal.
And to hell with our lives.
Someone has to start telling the truth.
Congratulations, comrades.
You are the last of 3,828 men.
You have performed your duties perfectly.
I wish you good health and long life.
All of you are awarded a bonus of 800 rubles.
- Thank you. - I serve the Soviet Union.
- Thank you. - I serve the Soviet Union.
- Thank you. - I serve the Soviet Union.
- Thank you. - I serve the Soviet Union.
- Thank you. - I serve the Soviet Union.
- Thank you. - I serve the Soviet Union.
- Thank you. - I serve the Soviet Union.
- Thank you. - I serve the Soviet Union.
- Thank you. - I serve the Soviet Union.
This session of court is now open.
The state calls Comrade Khomyuk.
To understand what happened that night,
we have to go back to the first critical moment.
The time is 28 past midnight.
At the trial, you're going to tell the truth.
1:22 a.m.
Once it's over, we will have our villains.
We will have our hero. We will have our truth.
1:23 and 35 seconds.
Comrade Boris Shcherbina.
It began with... a safety test.
1:23:42.
They died rescuing each other. Putting out fires.
Tending to the wounded.
1:23:45.
When your testimony arrives,
insist on reform.
I've already given my life.
Isn't that enough?
The state calls Comrade Legasov.
Congratulations, comrades. You're the last of 3,828 men.
I found this in the state archive.
I need your help.
Can you confirm that the reactor exploded
after they attempted to shut it down?
What, you think the right question
will get you the truth?
They're going to put Dyatlov on trial.
We're going to be asked to give expert testimony.
I've analyzed the data.
They shut the reactor down, and then it exploded.
You've seen this before.
I had no idea it could cause an explosion.
- So, it is their fault? - Yes.
But not only their fault.
We can make a deal with the KGB.
You'll leave this information out in Vienna.
They quietly let us fix the remaining reactors.
You have a chance to talk to the world.
Someone has to start telling the truth.
I hear they might promote Bryukhanov.
This little problem we have with the safety test...
if it's completed successfully,
yes, I think promotion's very likely.
Who knows, maybe Moscow.
Naturally, they'll put me in charge once he's gone,
and then I'll need someone to take my old job.
I could pick Sitnikov.
I would like to be considered.
I'll keep that in mind.
Viktor Petrovich,
preparations for the test have gone smoothly.
Comrade Dyatlov's been working per my instructions,
and Reactor 4 output's been reduced to 1600 megawatts.
With your approval, we're ready to continue lowering power to...
We have to wait.
Is, uh...?
Are you going to ask me if there's a problem, Nikolai?
You can't read a fucking face?
Three years, I've tried to finish this test.
Three years.
I've just had a call from the grid controller in Kiev.
He says we can't lower power any further,
not for another ten hours.
The grid controller? Where does he get off...
It's not the grid controller's decision, Dyatlov.
It's the end of the month.
All the productivity quotas.
Everyone's working overtime, the factories need power.
Someone's pushing down from above.
Although, we'll never know who.
So, do we have to scrap it or what?
No, I don't think so.
If we need to wait ten hours,
- we wait. - Running at half power,
we're not going to have stability issues?
- No, I-I should think... - I'm not asking you.
It's safe.
We'll maintain at 1600.
I'll go home, get some sleep, come back tonight.
We'll proceed then.
I'll personally supervise the test.
And it will be completed.
Well, I'm not waiting around then.
Call me when it's done.
How do you feel?
You went to the doctor yesterday.
How is your health?
You don't know?
From Vienna.
Do you read German?
It says, "At last a Soviet scientist who tells the truth."
Obviously, I resent the insinuation,
but I think it's fair to say,
you made an excellent impression at the conference.
Turns out, you're quite good at this.
At what? Lying?
Statecraft, Legasov. Statecraft.
The West is now satisfied
that Chernobyl was solely the result of operator error,
which it essentially was.
We have you to thank for that,
and we intend to.
"Hero of the Soviet Union."
Our highest honor.
They haven't even given it to me.
"Promotion to Director of the Kurchatov Institute."
I'm humbled.
I don't think there's anything humble about you, Valery Alexeyevich.
These rewards are not yours yet.
First, your testimony at the trial.
Comrade Charkov, I understand my duty to the State.
But you gave us assurances.
The reactors would be made safe.
It's been months, no changes have been made.
- No changes even discussed. - First, the trial.
Once it's over, we will have our villains,
we will have our hero, we will have our truth.
After that, we can deal with the reactors.
Did you take a train?
Yes, I took a train.
Now let's talk about Vienna.
I'm not here to scold you.
I know how the world works despite what Shcherbina says.
So... why are you here?
Because I'm brutally stubborn.
Which you were hoping for.
Charkov is saying they're going to fix the reactors after the trial.
Do you believe him?
The State will never willingly fix the reactors,
because acknowledging the problem means admitting that they lied.
They will have to be forced.
At the trial, you're going to tell the truth.
You're going to convince the jury.
It's a show trial.
The jury's already been handed their verdict.
I'm not talking about them.
The Central Committee have invited
members of the scientific community to observe the trial.
Our colleagues, from Kurchatov,
from Sredmash, from Minenergo,
they will be sitting in the crowd listening to every word you say.
A jury that only we know is there.
And when your testimony arrives at the moment of the explosion?
That is when our jury will finally hear the truth.
- And do what with it? - Insist on reform.
Not just to the RBMK, but the entire industry.
No, no, no, no, no.
- They can't function without us. - No, no, no.
Do you know what happened to Volkov
the man whose report you found?
They just removed him from his position at the Institute.
Sacked for the crime of knowing.
And you think that these scientists,
handpicked to witness a show trial,
will somehow be stirred into action by me?
Because of some heroic stance I take in defiance of the State?
- Yes. - Why?
Because you're Valery Legasov, and you mean something.
I'd like to think that if I spoke out, it would be enough.
But I know how the world works.
They will shoot me, Khomyuk.
You told me to find out what happened.
I spoke to dozens of people.
Every word they said, I wrote down.
All in these books.
These are the ones who are still alive.
These are the ones who are dead.
They died rescuing each other.
Putting out fires, tending to the wounded.
They didn't hesitate, they didn't waiver.
They simply did what had to be done.
So have I.
So have I.
I went willingly to an open reactor.
So I've already given my life.
Isn't that enough?
No, I'm sorry, but it is not.
The Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
and the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R.
has determined that justice be carried out
on behalf of the People
in accordance with the general goal of our Party
as determined by its 20th, 21st, and 22nd Congresses,
which is a Leninist goal.
It was, is, and will be
the only immutable goal in the Soviet state.
The path of Leninist principles
shall be consistently and undeviatingly followed
as it expresses the vital interests of the Soviet People,
its hopes and aspirations
as we guide the life of the Party and the State.
This session of court is now open,
Comrade Judge Milan Kadnikov presiding.
Indictments:
Viktor Bryukhanov,
Anatoly Dyatlov,
Nikolai Fomin...
are accused of violating Article 220 Section 2
of the Criminal Code of the Soviet Union,
resulting in a nuclear disaster on April 26, 1986.
The State calls witnesses Comrade Khomyuk
of the Byelorussian Nuclear Institute,
Comrade Legasov of the Kurchatov Institute of Atomic Energy,
and Comrade Boris Evdokimovich Shcherbina,
Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers
and head of the Bureau for Fuel and Energy.
It began with, of all things, a safety test.
Why was there need for a safety test at all?
Reactor Number 4 was not new when the accident occurred.
In fact, it went into operation on December 20th, 1983.
Eleven days later, on the last day of the year,
Plant Director Viktor Bryukhanov signed this document...
certifying the completion of the construction of the reactor.
As a result of finishing the work before the end of the year,
Comrade Bryukhanov was awarded Hero of Socialist Labor.
Comrade Fomin was awarded for Valorous Labor.
Comrade Dyatlov was given an Order of the Red Banner.
But their work was not finished.
And this document was a lie.
In order to sign this certificate,
all safety tests had to have been successfully completed,
and yet, one remained.
A nuclear reactor generates heat in the core here.
A series of pumps, here and here,
send a constant flow of cooling water through the core.
The core's heat turns the water to steam,
and the steam spins the turbine here,
and the result is electricity.
But what if a power plant has no power?
What if the power feeding the plant itself is disrupted?
A blackout, equipment failure,
or an attack by a foreign enemy?
If there's no power,
the pumps cannot move water through the core.
And without water, the core overheats,
the fuel melts down.
In short, a nuclear disaster.
The solution?
Three diesel fuel backup generators here.
So, problem solved?
No.
Bryukhanov knew that the problem was not solved at all.
The backup generators took approximately one minute
to reach the speed required
to power the pumps and prevent a meltdown,
and by that time, it would be too late.
So we arrive at the safety test.
The theory was this: If the facility lost power,
the turbine, which had been spinning,
would take some time to slow down and stop.
What if you could take the electricity
it was still generating and transfer it to the pumps?
What if the dying turbine
could keep the pumps working long enough
to bridge the 60-second gap until the generators came on?
Any questions?
No. Continue, please.
To test this theory,
the reactor is placed in a reduced power mode...
700 megawatts...
to simulate a blackout condition.
Then the turbines are turned off,
and as they slowly spin down,
their electrical output is measured
to see if it's enough to power the pumps.
The science is strong,
but a test is only as good as the men carrying it out.
Now, the first time they tried, they failed.
The second time they tried, they failed.
The third time they tried, they failed.
The fourth time they tried
was April 26th, 1986.
Comrade Khomyuk.
To understand what happened that night,
we have to go back ten hours earlier...
April 25th, the day the test was meant to take place.
By two in the afternoon,
the reactor has been lowered by half
from its normal output level of 3200 megawatts
to 1600 megawatts and is stable
and ready to be reduced to its final output level for the test:
700 megawatts.
But before they can proceed, there is a phone call.
Power grid officials in Kiev say that they cannot afford
a further reduction in the electricity until after midnight.
They are asking for a ten-hour delay.
This is the first critical moment,
the first link in the chain of disaster.
Competent management would have insisted on canceling the test.
These three men allowed it to proceed.
Why was this delay so dangerous?
It created two problems:
One of them is scientific in nature...
and the other is very human.
This is the one we will consider first.
At midnight, there is a shift change.
Hey.
- Khodemchuk... - Forget it. Find another fool.
Toptunov, want to buy a motorcycle?
Toptunov? He's just a little boy.
He's got more hair on his face than on his balls.
Hair? Is that what's on his lip?
Leonid Fedorovych.
Akimov says to come to the control room as soon as you can.
- Is he already here? - He came in early.
Something about a test.
You see? Desperate.
Sasha?
Ah. You know the test they were supposed to run?
The turbine rundown, they tried it last year.
They couldn't do it on the day shift, so they've given it to us.
To us?
- We don't know what... - Shh.
- We don't know what it is. - It's fine.
We take it down to 700, hold it there,
the rest is Stolyarchuk and Kirschenbaum, but...
Dyatlov is gonna be supervising.
I have to do something I've never done before
with Dyatlov looking over my shoulder?
Yeah, well, don't worry, we'll do it together.
I'm looking at the instructions now.
Are we supposed to do those or not?
Yes, this is Akimov in 4.
I have the manual for the rundown test.
You did it last year.
Yes, in the program there's instructions of what to do,
and then, well, there's a lot of things crossed out.
What should I...?
Well, what should I...?
Are you sure?
Right. Thank you.
He says to follow the crossed-out instructions.
So then why are they crossed out?
We've been cleared to run the test.
1600. Good.
Now, is it too much to ask that you all know what you're doing?
- Well... - Yes. Absolutely.
- Stolyarchuk? - Yes.
- Kirschenbaum? - Uh, I haven't reviewed.
We only just found out really...
There, review it.
Or you can just do what I tell you.
I think even you, stupid as you are, can manage that.
Well, let's go.
I'm supposed to switch the turbine off while the reactor's still running?
- This is not good... - Shut the fuck up and do your job!
Toptunov, reduce power to 700.
I've never done this with the power so low before.
It's okay. I'm with you.
Reducing power to 700.
I want you to think of Yuri Gagarin.
I want you to imagine that he has been told nothing
of his mission into space until the moment that he is on the launch pad.
I want you to imagine that all he has
is a list of instructions that he has never seen before,
some of which have been crossed out.
This is exactly what was happening
in the control room of Reactor 4.
The night shift had not been trained to perform the experiment.
They hadn't even been warned it was happening.
Leonid Toptunov,
the operator responsible for controlling and stabilizing
the reactor that night was... all of 25 years old.
And his total experience on the job?
Four months.
This is the human problem created by the delay.
But inside the reactor core,
in the space between the atoms themselves,
something far more dangerous is forming.
A poison.
The time is 28 past midnight.
Comrade Legasov.
I'm pleased to see some of my colleagues here
from the Kurchatov Institute and Minenergo.
But you don't need to be a nuclear scientist
to understand what happened at Chernobyl.
You only need to know this:
there are essentially two things that happen
inside a nuclear reactor.
The reactivity which generates power
either goes up, or it goes down.
That's it.
All the operators do is maintain balance.
Uranium fuel.
As uranium atoms split apart and collide,
reactivity goes up.
But if you don't balance the reactivity,
it never stops rising. So...
Boron control rods.
They reduce reactivity like brakes on a car.
But there's a third factor to consider: water.
Cool water takes heat out of the system.
As it does, it turns to steam, or what we call a "void."
In an RBMK reactor of the type used at Chernobyl,
there's something called a "positive void coefficient."
What does that mean?
It means that the more steam present within the system,
the higher the reactivity,
which means more heat, which means more steam,
which means...
It would appear we have a vicious cycle on our hands.
And we would, were it not for this...
And we would, were it not for this:
the negative temperature coefficient.
When nuclear fuel gets hotter, it gets less reactive, so...
fuel increases reactivity.
Control rods and water reduce it.
Steam increases it,
and the rise in temperature reduces it.
This is the invisible dance
that powers entire cities without smoke or flame.
And it is beautiful
when things are normal.
As uranium splits apart to release energy,
it breaks down into a new element, xenon.
Xenon reduces reactivity.
This is the poison Comrade Khomyuk mentioned.
When the core is running at full power,
it burns the xenon away before it can cause a problem.
But because of the delay,
Chernobyl Reactor 4 has been held at half power
for ten hours.
The xenon did not burn away.
It built up, poisoning the core.
We're starting to lose balance.
At 28 minutes past midnight,
the reactor is now primed to slow down.
And yet, in less than an hour, it will explode.
If you can't understand how a stalled nuclear reactor
could lead to an explosion, I don't blame you.
After all, you don't work in the control room
of a nuclear power plant.
But as it turned out, the men who did
didn't understand it either.
Easy now.
Take it down.
Good. Like that.
You should have finished by now.
We're following protocol for reduction rate.
You're procrastinating.
There are ten other men in this plant who would've done it already.
Keep working. You're doing fine.
Kirschenbaum, come get me when these old women are ready.
Yes, Comrade Dyatlov.
Okay, very slow now.
Let's ease it down to 700.
- Whoa, whoa, whoa. Slow. - I-I didn't move any rods there.
- What is this? - I'm not even touching it.
We did everything right. I think that maybe the core is poisoned.
Well, if you thought the core was poisoned,
then you didn't do everything right,
because you're choking my reactor!
Get it back up!
Uh, I think if we turn off LAC,
it may be possible to get more control.
- Do it. Go. - Switch off local automatic control.
Go to global. Leonid.
LAC disabled. Global control activated.
What did you do?
- I-I did what you said. I switched... - Look at it!
- I don't understand. - Fucking amateurs.
You stalled the reactor.
How the fuck did you get this job?
Comrade Dyatlov...
You're gonna tell me you did everything right again,
you incompetent asshole?
I apologize for this unsatisfactory result.
- What are you doing? - We have to shut all the way down.
- No. - We could be in a xenon pit.
We have to shut down and wait for 24 hours.
No. We're doing the test tonight. Raise power to 700.
We can't raise the power from here.
- The rules... - Don't talk to me about rules.
- If we fall from 80%... - No, no. We fell from 50%.
- Fifty percent is worse! - The rules don't say 50!
- There is no rule! - Comrade Dyatlov,
I apologize, but what you're saying makes no sense.
- Raise the power. - No.
I won't do it. It isn't safe.
Safety first. Always.
I've been saying that for 25 years.
That's how long I've done this job, 25 years.
Is that longer than you, Akimov?
Yes.
- Is it much longer? - Yes.
And you with your mother's tit barely out of your mouth?
So if I say it's safe, it's safe.
And if the two of you disagree,
then you don't have to work here and you won't.
But not just here. You won't work at Kursk
or Ignalina or Leningrad or Novo-Voronezh.
You won't work anywhere ever again. I'll see to it.
I think you know I will see to it.
Raise the power.
I would like you to record your command.
Raise the power.
Together, then.
I wasn't even there.
What?
I wasn't in the room when they raised the power.
If you weren't there, then where were you?
Comrade Legasov, you are a witness, not a prosecutor.
I will ask the questions here.
If you weren't in the room, then where were you?
The toilet.
The toilet?
Comrade Khomyuk interviewed everyone
who was in the control room that night.
They all told the same story.
"I knew what Dyatlov ordered was wrong,
but if I didn't do what he said, I would be fired."
Leonid Toptunov.
One day before he died.
No, Comrade Dyatlov, you were in the room.
You ordered them to raise the power.
This is a fact.
Court is now in recess.
Thirty minutes.
Do you know anything about this town, Chernobyl?
Not really, no.
It was mostly Jews and Poles.
The Jews were killed in pogroms,
and Stalin forced the Poles out.
And then the Nazis came and killed whoever was left.
But after the war...
people came to live here anyway.
They knew the ground under their feet was soaked in blood,
but they didn't care.
Dead Jews, dead Poles.
But not them.
No one ever thinks it's going to happen to them.
And here we are.
How much time?
Maybe a year.
They call it a...
They call it a "long illness."
It doesn't seem very long to me.
I know you told me, and I believed you.
But time passed, and I thought,
it wouldn't happen to me.
I wasted it.
I wasted it all for nothing.
For nothing?
Do you remember that morning when I first called you,
how unconcerned I was?
I don't believe much that comes out of the Kremlin,
but when they told me they were putting me
in charge of the cleanup
and they said it wasn't serious, I believed them.
You know why?
Because they put you in charge.
Yeah.
I'm an inconsequential man, Valera.
That's all I've ever been.
I hoped that one day I would matter, but I didn't.
I just stood next to people who did.
There are other scientists like me.
Any one of them could have done what I did.
But you...
Everything we asked for, everything we needed.
Men, material, lunar rovers.
Who else could have done these things?
They heard me, but they listened to you.
Of all the ministers and all the deputies...
entire congregation of obedient fools...
they mistakenly sent the one good man.
For God's sake, Boris,
you were the one who mattered most.
Ah, it's beautiful.
Comrade Legasov.
The time is 38 past midnight.
The reactor is nearly shut down.
The operators of Reactor 4 are locked on a path
that leads directly to disaster.
There's no way to turn back.
They do not yet know it, but the die is cast.
At 30 megawatts, xenon is still being created,
but none of it is burning away.
The reactor is drowning in poison.
To make matters worse, the reactor isn't hot enough
to produce sufficient steam.
The only way to safely raise power from this state
is to do it very, very slowly
over the course of 24 hours.
But Dyatlov wants it done now.
Akimov and Toptunov have only one course of action.
They begin pulling control rods out.
Dozens at a time.
Halfway out, three-quarters of the way out,
still, the power does not budge.
So they begin pulling them all the way out.
There were 211 control rods in Reactor 4.
Akimov and Toptunov completely withdrew 205.
Remember... control rods are the brakes on this car.
Of 211 rods, only six now remain in the reactor.
As for the fuel, it's gone cold,
so the negative temperature coefficient
is no longer weighing down the reactivity.
But even still, the xenon poisoning is so strong,
the best they can do is raise the power to 200 megawatts.
The control rods are out.
The emergency system has been disconnected.
The only thing keeping the reactor in check
is water and xenon.
It's one in the morning. The test is minutes away.
I'm sorry, this is all we can get.
It's 200 megawatts. We've pulled almost everything out.
If that's all we have, that's all we have.
- But the test requires 700. - Stolyarchuk, let's get ready.
- Switch on pump 4. - No, wait a second.
- Stolyarchuk... - We have barely enough steam as it is.
The turbine is going too slow for the test to deliver any valid results.
- It's enough. - And if we add more water,
- there will be even less... - I said it's enough.
I know what I'm doing. Stolyarchuk.
Main Pump 4, connected.
We should warn Khodemchuk. The pipes are gonna be...
Never mind him. Kirschenbaum?
The steam in the separator drum is too low... five atmospheres.
All right, let's all help him. Get it up as best you can.
We should stop.
Turn that fucking thing off.
You have 15 minutes.
Fifteen minutes.
They may as well have had 15 days.
The problem they were facing was not solvable.
The power was too low, the water was too high.
The test was already ruined.
The results would have been useless,
but Dyatlov didn't care.
All he wanted to do was report a completed test.
1:22 a.m.
Less than two minutes remain.
Yuvchenko, a mechanical engineer, is in his office.
Perevozchenko, reactor section foreman,
is in the refueling hall,
high above the 1,000-ton steel reactor cover.
Degtaryenko and Khodemchuk,
circulation operators, are in the pump room.
None of them have been told
about the test.
None of them know what is about to happen.
At 1:22 and 30 seconds,
Toptunov sees a report
from the reactor's SKALA computer system.
Based on the absence of sufficient control rods,
the computer is recommending that the reactor be shut down.
Well, of course it's saying that.
It doesn't know we're running a test.
All right, comrades.
Another few minutes, it will all be over.
Kirschenbaum, when you're ready.
We did everything right.
Oscillograph on.
Closing Number 8 throttle valve.
Generator rotor beginning rundown.
1:23 and four seconds.
With every decision,
they have pulled this reactor back like a slingshot,
further than anyone has ever pulled,
now the test begins.
The pumps are shut down, and they've let go.
The pumps stop moving water through the reactor.
Uranium fuel is now unchecked by fresh coolant,
unchecked by control rods.
The balance immediately swings in the opposite direction.
In less than a second,
reactivity increases.
Inside the core,
the remaining water is quickly converting to steam.
A void is being created.
There is no fresh water to replace it.
Steam increases reactivity,
increases heat, increases steam,
increases reactivity.
The remaining xenon decays away.
The power is rising.
There's nothing left to stop it.
1:23 and 35 seconds.
We have a power surge! Sasha!
What did you do?!
1:23 and 40 seconds.
In every control room of every nuclear reactor in the world,
there is a button with one single purpose...
to "scram," or instantly shut down, the reaction.
In Soviet reactors, that button is called AZ-5.
You press AZ-5, all of the control rods insert at once,
and the reaction is stopped dead.
But...
What are you waiting for, Legasov? Tell your lies.
Comrade Dyatlov, you will not be warned again.
- Or what? - For God's sake, Dyatlov.
Legasov's already given it away.
He said before, there was no way to avoid what was coming.
- He knows something. She knows something. - Comrade Dyatlov.
I know what you are, Valery Alexeyevich.
- You're a liar. - We've heard enough for today.
The defendants will be remanded in custody.
- Court will... - I... I haven't finished.
I still have more evidence to give.
It's not necessary. Your testimony is concluded.
- Your Honor. - Court is now adjourned.
- We will resume tomorrow with... - Let him finish.
Comrade Shcherbina...
Let him finish.
Dyatlov broke every rule we have.
He pushed a reactor to the brink of destruction.
He did these things believing there was a failsafe.
AZ-5, a simple button to shut it all down.
But in the circumstances he created, there wasn't.
The shutdown system had a fatal flaw.
At 1:23:40, Akimov engages AZ-5.
The fully-withdrawn control rods
begin moving back into the reactor.
These rods are made of boron, which reduces reactivity,
but not their tips.
The tips are made of graphite, which accelerates reactivity.
Why?
Why?
For the same reason our reactors
do not have containment buildings around them,
like those in the West.
For the same reason we don't use
properly enriched fuel in our cores.
For the same reason we are the only nation
that builds water-cooled, graphite-moderated reactors
with a positive void coefficient.
It's cheaper.
The first part of the rods that enter the core
are the graphite tips.
And when they do, the reaction in the core,
which had been rising, skyrockets.
Every last molecule of liquid water
instantly converts to steam,
which expands and ruptures a series of fuel rod channels.
The control rods in those channels can move no further.
The graphite tips are fixed in position,
endlessly accelerating the reaction.
Chernobyl Reactor 4 is now a nuclear bomb.
1:23:42.
Perevozchenko looks down
on the enormous steel lid of the reactor...
...and sees the impossible.
The control rod and fuel channel caps,
which each weigh 350 kilograms,
are jumping up and down.
He runs to warn the control room.
But there's nothing he can do to stop what is coming.
1:23 and 44 seconds.
The steam blows more fuel channels apart.
We do not know how high the power went.
We only know the final reading.
Reactor 4,
designed to operate at 3200 megawatts,
went beyond 33,000.
The pressure inside the core can no longer be held back.
At long last, we have arrived. 1:23:45, explosion.
In the instant the lid is thrown off the reactor, oxygen rushes in.
It combines with hydrogen and super-heated graphite.
The chain of disaster is now complete.
Comrade Dyatlov!
Comrade Dyatlov!
No one in the room that night knew
the shutdown button could act as a detonator.
They didn't know it,
because it was kept from them.
Comrade Legasov, you're contradicting
your own testimony in Vienna.
My testimony in Vienna was a lie.
I lied to the world.
I'm not the only one who kept this secret.
There are many.
We were following orders,
from the KGB, from the Central Committee.
And right now, there are 16 reactors in the Soviet Union
with the same fatal flaw.
Three of them are still running
less than 20 kilometers away at Chernobyl.
Professor Legasov, if you mean to suggest the Soviet State
is somehow responsible for what happened,
then I must warn you, you are treading on dangerous ground.
I've already trod on dangerous ground.
We're on dangerous ground right now,
because of our secrets and our lies.
They're practically what define us.
When the truth offends, we lie and lie
until we can no longer remember it is even there.
But it is still there.
Every lie we tell incurs a debt to the truth.
Sooner or later, that debt is paid.
That is how an RBMK reactor core explodes.
Lies.
Valery Alexeyevich Legasov,
son of Alexei Legasov,
Head of Ideological Compliance, Central Committee.
Do you know what your father did there?
Yes.
As a student, you had a leadership position in Komsomol.
Communist Youth, correct?
- You already know. - Answer the question.
Yes.
At the Kuchartov Institute,
you were the Communist Party secretary.
In the position, you limited
the promotion of Jewish scientists.
Yes.
To curry favor with Kremlin officials.
You're one of us, Legasov.
I can do anything I want with you.
But what I want most is for you to know that I know.
You're not brave.
You're not heroic.
You're just a dying man who forgot himself.
I know who I am, and I know what I've done.
In a just world, I'd be shot for my lies,
but not for this, not for the truth.
Scientists...
and your idiot obsessions with reasons.
When the bullet hits your skull,
what will it matter why?
No one's getting shot, Legasov.
The whole world saw you in Vienna.
It would be embarrassing to kill you now.
And for what?
Your testimony today will not be accepted by the State.
It will not be disseminated in the press.
It never happened.
No, you will live,
however long you have,
but not as a scientist, not anymore.
You'll keep your title and your office,
but no duties, no authority, no friends.
No one will talk to you.
No one will listen to you.
Other men, lesser men,
will receive credit for the things you have done.
Your legacy is now their legacy.
You'll live long enough to see that.
What role did Shcherbina play in this?
None.
He didn't know what I was gonna say.
What role did Khomyuk play in this?
None.
She didn't know either.
After all you've said and done today,
it would be curious if you chose this moment to lie.
I would think a man of your experience
would know a lie when he hears one.
You will not meet or communicate
with either one of them ever again.
You will not communicate with anyone
about Chernobyl ever again.
You will remain so immaterial to the world around you
that when you finally do die,
it will be exceedingly hard to know that you ever lived at all.
What if I refuse?
Why worry about something that isn't going to happen?
"Why worry about something that isn't going to happen?"
Oh, that's perfect.
They should put that on our money.
To be a scientist is to be naive.
We are so focused on our search for truth,
we fail to consider how few actually want us to find it.
But it is always there, whether we see it or not,
whether we choose to or not.
The truth doesn't care about our needs or wants.
It doesn't care about our governments,
our ideologies, our religions.
It will lie in wait for all time.
And this, at last, is the gift of Chernobyl.
Where I once would fear the cost of truth,
now I only ask:
What is the cost of lies?
Do you not understand? Krypton's core is collapsing.
We may only have a matter of weeks. I warned you.
Harvesting the core was suicide. It has accelerated...
- ... the process of implosion. - Our energy reserves...
...were exhausted. What would you have us do, El?
Look to the stars, like our ancestors did.
There are habitable worlds within reach. We can begin by using the old outposts.
Are you seriously suggesting that we evacuate the entire planet?
No. Everybody here is already dead.
Give me control of the Codex. I will ensure the survival of our race.
There is still hope.
I have held that hope in my hands.
This council has been disbanded.
On whose authority?
Mine.
The rest of you will be tried and punished accordingly.
- What are you doing, Zod? This is madness. What I should have done...
...years ago.
These lawmakers...
...with their endless debates...
...have lead Krypton to ruin.
And if your forces prevail...
- ... you'll be the leader of nothing. - Then join me.
Help me save our race. We'll start anew.
We'll sever...
...the degenerative bloodlines that led us to this state.
And who will decide which bloodlines survive, Zod?
You?
Don't do this, El.
The last thing I want is for us to be enemies.
You have abandoned the principles that bound us together.
You've taken up the sword...
...against your own people.
I will honor the man you once were, Zod...
...not this monster you've become.
Take him away.
Sir? Is everything all right?
Out of the way.
I said-
Get me Lara.
Jor. Behind you.
Lara, you have to ready the launch.
I'll be with you as soon as I can.
H'Raka!
- Can you see the Codex? It's just beneath the central hub.
But I'm compelled to warn you.
Breaching the genesis chamber is a Class-B crime-
Nobody cares anymore, Kelex. The world is about to come to an end.
Jor-El, by the authority of General Zod...
...surrender the Codex.
Easy, H'Raka.
Did you find a world?
- We have. Orbiting a main sequence yellow star...
.. just as you said it would.
A young star.
His cells will drink its radiation.
It's a seemingly intelligent population.
He'll be an outcast.
A freak.
They'll kill him.
How?
He'll be a god to them.
What if the ship doesn't make it?
He'll die out there...
...alone.
I can't do it.
I thought I could, but...
- Lara. - ... now that he's here...
Krypton is doomed.
It's his only chance now.
It's our people's only hope.
What is it, Kelex?
Five attack ships converging from the east.
Citadel's defenses are being scanned and evaluated.
I'll upload the Codex.
No, wait.
Lara.
Just let me look at him.
We'll never get to see him walk.
Never hear him say our names.
But out there...
...amongst the stars...
...he will live.
Goodbye, my son.
Our hopes and dreams travel with you.
Concentrate fire on the main doors.
Lady Lara.
- The phantom drives are coming online. - Proceed to ignition.
General.
We have identified an engine ignition within the citadel.
A launch.
Hold this platform, commander.
I know you stole the Codex, Jor-El.
Surrender it...
...and I'll let you live.
This is a second chance for all of Krypton...
...not just the bloodlines you deem worthy.
What have you done?
We've had a child, Zod.
A boy child.
Krypton's first natural birth in centuries.
And he will be free.
Free to forge his own destiny.
Heresy.
Destroy it.
Lara...
...listen to me.
The Codex is Krypton's future.
Abort the launch.
No!
Your son, Lara...
...where have you sent him?
His name...
...is Kal...
...son of El.
And he's beyond your reach.
Bring that ship down.
Target locked.
Lay down your weapons.
Your forces are surrounded.
General Zod...
...for the crimes of murder and high treason...
...the Council has sentenced you and your fellow insurgents...
...to three hundred cycles of somatic reconditioning.
Do you have any last words?
You won't kill us yourself!
You wouldn't sully your hands! But you'll damn us...
...to a black hole for eternity!
Jor-El was right.
You're a pack of fools, every last one of you.
And you.
You believe your son is safe?
I will find him.
I will reclaim what you have taken from us.
I will find him.
I will find him, Lara.
I will find him!
Lady Lara, shouldn't you find refuge?
There is no refuge, Kelor.
Jor-El was right.
This is the end.
Make a better world than ours, Kal.
Watch it, dumb-ass!
Keep your eyes open or you're gonna get squashed.
Where the hell did they find you, greenhorn?
Let's get this trap in the air.
Gentlemen, secure the deck.
We just got a distress call from a rig due west of us.
Secure the deck.
All civilian boats, stand clear.
The sub-sea valves failed and the rig is about to explode.
Roger, Coast Guard. What about the men left inside?
Forget them. They're dead. - Greenhorn...
...fetch me my binoculars.
Greenhorn.
This is the last of the oxygen. I don't know how much longer we can hold out.
This is Coast Guard 6510. We'll make one more pass then get out.
Wait, wait. I got some guys on the helipad.
Come on, come on! Let's go! Let's go!
- Let's go! Let's go!
Get that last guy loaded.
We have got to go.
Hey, let's go. What are you doing?
Go! Go!
- when Kansas became a territory?
Clark.
Are you listening, Clark?
I asked if you could tell me who first...
...settled Kansas.
Are you all right, Clark?
Clark.
Clark.
Clark!
Clark, come out of there.
Leave me alone.
Clark, I have called your mother.
Clark?
I'm here.
Clark, honey, it's Mom.
Will you open the door?
What's wrong with him? He's such a freak.
Crybaby.
His parents won't even let him play with other kids.
I know.
Sweetie.
How can I help you if you won't let me in?
The world's too big, Mom.
Then make it small.
Just, um...
...focus on my voice.
Pretend it's an island...
...out in the ocean.
Can you see it?
I see it.
Then swim towards it, honey.
What's wrong with me, Mom?
Clark.
Clark.
Did you get everything I need? Yep.
Hold it, hold it.
Hey, ass-wipe.
What do you think? You see the game?
- Leave him alone, Pete. - What are you, his girlfriend?
I wanna hear what he has to say.
Come on...
...dick-splash.
My son was there.
He was in the bus.
- He saw what Clark did. I know he did.
- I'm sure what he thought he saw was- - Was an act of God, Jonathan.
This was providence.
I think you're blowing it out of proportion.
No, I'm not. Lana saw it too.
And the Fordham boy.
This isn't the first time...
...Clark's done something like this.
I just wanted to help.
I know you did, but we talked about this.
Right?
Right? We talked about this. You have...
Clark, you have to keep this side of yourself a secret.
What was I supposed to do? Just let them die?
Maybe.
There's more at stake here than just our lives, Clark, or the lives of those around us.
When the world...
When the world finds out what you can do it's gonna change everything. Our...
Our beliefs, our notions of...
...what it means to be human. Everything.
You saw how Pete's mom reacted, right?
She was scared, Clark.
Why?
People are afraid of what they don't understand.
Is she right?
Did God do this to me?
Tell me.
We found you in this.
We were sure the government was gonna show up on our doorstep...
...but no one ever came.
This was in that chamber with you.
I took it to a metallurgist...
...at Kansas State.
He said whatever it was made from didn't even...
Didn't even exist on the periodic table.
That's another way of saying...
...that it's not from this world, Clark.
And neither are you.
You're the answer, son.
You're the answer to "Are we alone in the universe?"
I don't wanna be.
And I don't blame you, son.
It'd be a huge burden for anyone to bear.
But you're not just anyone, Clark, and I have to believe that you were...
That you were sent here for a reason.
All these changes that you're going through, one day...
One day you're gonna think of them as a blessing. When that day comes...
...you have to make a choice.
A choice of whether to stand proud in front of the human race or not.
Can't I just keep pretending I'm your son?
You are my son.
But somewhere out there you've...
You have another father too, who gave you another name.
And he sent you here...
...for a reason, Clark.
And even if it takes you the rest of your life, you owe it to yourself...
...to find out what that reason is.
Wait a second. Aren't you here for the exercise?
No, there was a change in the plans.
Somebody found something strange on Ellesmere.
- Aircom's making runs out there all week. That rat hole?
- You gotta be kidding me. - I know. It's crazy.
The Americans are there too, lots of them.
Anything else? They're calling it an anomalous object.
- Whatever that means. - Back off, Ludlow. I'm serious.
Oh, come on, Chrissy. - Knock it off.
- Sit down. Let me go.
Hey. Leave her alone, man.
Or what, tough guy?
Or I'm gonna have to ask you to leave.
I think I'll probably just leave when I'm good and ready.
Oh, there he is.
It's not worth it, sweetie.
Hey, asshole, don't forget your tip.
Strike.
Thanks.
Hi.
Miss Lane. How you doing?
- Good. - Jed Eubanks, Arctic Cargo.
How far to the station?
- Camp's just over the rise. I'll walk you over. - Great.
Joe can take your bags. Joe.
Help her out.
Careful with those. They're heavy.
I gotta confess, Miss Lane...
...I'm not a fan of the Daily Planet.
But those pieces you wrote when you were embedded with the 1 st Division were...
Well, they were pretty impressive.
Well, what can I say? I get writer's block if I'm not wearing a flak jacket.
Miss Lane.
I'm Colonel Hardy, U.S. Northcom. Dr. Emil Hamilton...
...from DARPA.
- You're early. - Hi.
We were expecting you tomorrow.
Which is why I showed up today.
Look, let's get one thing straight, guys, okay?
The only reason I'm here is because we're on Canadian soil...
...and the appellate court overruled your injunction to keep me away.
So if we're done measuring dicks...
...can you have your people show me what you found?
NASA's EOS satellites...
...pinged the anomaly first.
The ice shelf plays hell on the echo soundings.
- But there's something there. A submarine, maybe?
Soviet-era?
Doubtful. That's 300 meters.
Considerably larger than anything we know they built back then.
But here's the spooky part.
The ice surrounding the object...
...it's nearly twenty thousand years old.
Miss Lane?
Try not to wander.
Temperatures drop to minus 40 at night around here.
Wouldn't find your body till after spring.
And there you go.
What if I need to tinkle?
There's a bucket in the corner.
Where the hell are you going?
Hello?
It's all right, it's all right, it's all right. It's all right.
You're hemorrhaging internally...
...and if I don't cauterize this bleed...
How can-?
I can do things that other people can't.
Now hold my hand.
This is gonna hurt.
What Colonel Hardy and his team surmised...
...was a Soviet-era submarine...
...was actually something much more exotic.
An isotope analysis of the surrounding ice bores suggests that an object...
...had been trapped in the glacier for over 18,000 years.
As for my rescuer?
He disappeared during the object's departure.
A background check revealed that his work history...
...and identity had been falsified.
The questions raised by my rescuer's...
...existence are frightening to contemplate...
...but I also know what I saw.
"And I have arrived at the inescapable conclusion...
...that the object and its occupant...
...did not originate on Earth. "
I can't print this, Lois. You might have hallucinated half of it.
What about the contractors who corroborated...
- ... my story? - The Pentagon is denying that there was a ship.
Of course they are. They're supposed to.
It's the Pentagon.
Perry, it's me we're talking about.
- I'm a Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter. - Then act like it.
- Print it or I walk. - You can't.
You're under contract.
I'm not running a story about aliens walking among us.
Never gonna happen.
That's a Scotch, straight-up, for the lady.
I'm sending you the article.
My editor won't print it, but if it leaked online...
Got it.
But didn't you once describe my site...
...as a creeping cancer of falsehoods?
I stand by my words, Woodburn, but I want this story...
- ... out there. - Why?
Because I want my mystery man to know I know the truth.
Recursive diagnostics complete.
Guiding presence authenticated.
All systems operational.
To see you standing there having grown into an adult...
If only Lara could have witnessed this.
Who are you?
I am your father, Kal.
Or at least a shadow of him.
His consciousness.
My name was Jor-El.
And Kal?
That's my name.
Kal-El. It is.
I have so many questions.
Where do I come from?
Why did you send me here?
You came from Krypton.
A world with a much harsher environment than Earth's.
Long ago...
...in an era of expansion...
...our race spread out through the stars...
...seeking new worlds to settle upon.
This scout ship was one of thousands launched into the void.
We built outposts on other planets...
...using great machines to reshape environments to our needs.
For 100,000 years, our civilization flourished...
...accomplishing wonders.
What happened?
Artificial population control was established.
The outposts on space exploration were abandoned.
We exhausted our natural resources.
As a result, our planet's core became unstable.
Eventually, our military leader...
...General Zod, attempted a coup.
But by then it was too late.
Your mother and I foresaw the coming calamity...
...and we took certain steps to ensure your survival.
This is a genesis chamber.
All Kryptonians were conceived in chambers such as this.
Every child was designed to fulfill a pre-determined role in our society...
...as a worker...
...a warrior, a leader and so on.
Your mother and I believed Krypton lost something precious.
The element of choice, of chance.
What if a child dreamed of becoming something...
...other than what society had intended for him or her?
What if a child aspired to something greater?
You were the embodiment of that belief, Kal.
Krypton's first natural birth in centuries.
That's why we risked so much to save you.
Why didn't you come with me?
We couldn't, Kal.
No matter how much...
...we wanted to.
No matter how much we loved you.
Your mother, Lara, and I...
...were a product of the failures of our world as much as Zod was...
...tied to its fate.
- So I'm alone. - No.
You're as much a child of Earth now as you are of Krypton.
You can embody the best of both worlds.
A dream your mother and I dedicated our lives to preserve.
The people of Earth are different from us, it's true.
But, ultimately, I believe that's a good thing.
They won't necessarily make the same mistakes we did.
Not if you guide them, Kal.
Not if you give them hope.
That's what this symbol means.
The symbol of the house of El means hope.
Embodied within that hope is the fundamental belief...
...in the potential of every person to be a force for good.
That's what you can bring them.
Why am I so different from them?
Earth's sun is younger and brighter than Krypton's was.
Your cells have drunken its radiation...
...strengthening your muscles, your skin, your senses.
Earth's gravity is weaker, yet its atmosphere is more nourishing.
You've grown stronger here than I ever could have imagined.
The only way to know how strong...
...is to keep testing your limits.
You will give the people of Earth an ideal to strive towards.
They'll race behind you.
They will stumble.
They will fall.
But in time...
...they will join you in the sun, Kal.
In time...
...you will help them accomplish wonders.
How do you find someone who has spent a lifetime covering his tracks?
You start with the urban legends...
- ... that have sprung up in his wake. That's Joe.
The friends of a friend...
- ... who have seen him. He worked here.
For some he was a guardian angel. For others, a cipher...
...a ghost who never quite fit in.
Well, I was saying we were...
...coming towards the oil rig.
As you work your way back in time, the stories form a pattern.
I'm looking for a Pete Ross. Do you know him?
Yeah, he works at the IHOP. If you go down the road...
Pete Ross?
I'd like to talk to you about an accident when you were younger.
A school bus that went into the river.
Dusty. Shh-shh-shh.
Mrs. Kent?
I'm Lois Lane. I'm from the Daily Planet.
Quiet.
I'm from the Daily Planet and I'd like to talk to you about your son.
I figured if I turned over enough stones you'd eventually find me.
Where are you from? What are you doing here?
Let me tell your story.
What if I don't want my story told?
It's going to come out eventually.
Somebody's going to get a photograph or figure out where you live.
- Then I'll disappear again. - The only way you could disappear...
...is to stop helping people altogether, and I sense that's not an option for you.
My father believed that if the world found out who I really was...
...they'd reject me...
...out of fear.
I'm tired of safe.
I just wanna do something useful with my life.
So farming, feeding people. That's not useful?
I didn't say that.
Our family's been farming for five generations.
Your family, not mine.
I don't even know why I'm listening to you. You're not my dad.
You're just some guy who found me in a field.
Clark.
It's all right, Martha.
He's right. Clark has a point.
We're not your parents.
But we've been doing the best we can.
And we've been making this up as we go along, so maybe...
Maybe our best isn't good enough anymore.
Look, Dad-
Hold on.
Go for the overpass.
Go for the overpass!
Take cover! Take cover!
Over there. Just follow them. Take cover.
She's stuck.
Hank's still in the car.
Hank's in the car.
- I'll get him, I'll get him. No, no.
Get your mom to the overpass.
Hank! Hank! Come!
- Jonathan! - Mom, it's okay.
- Jonathan! - Mom, stay here.
Dad!
I let my father die because I trusted him.
Because he was convinced that I had to wait.
That the world was not ready.
What do you think?
You better watch out, Lois.
Hey, Perry's gunning for you.
He knows you're Woodburn's anonymous source and cannot wait to rip you a new one.
Oh, look at her. Ha, ha, ha.
I told you not to run with this, and what do you do?
You let Woodburn just shotgun it all over the Internet.
Now the publishers want me to sue you.
Well, if it makes a difference, I'm dropping it.
Whoa, just like that?
Yep.
What happened to your leads?
They didn't pan out. The story is smoke.
Or it didn't get the traction you hoped?
Two weeks leave...
...no pay, that's your penance.
You try something like this again...
- ... you're done here. - Fine.
Let's make it three weeks since you're so willing to agree.
- Perry. - No, no. Don't. Don't.
I believe you saw something, Lois.
But not for a moment do I believe that your leads just went cold.
So whatever your reasons are for dropping it...
...I think you're doing the right thing.
Why?
Can you imagine how people on this planet would react...
...if they knew there was someone like this out there?
Go get him.
Well, look at you.
A reporter came by here.
She's a friend. Don't worry.
Mom.
- Heh, heh, heh. - What?
- I found them. - Who?
My parents.
My people.
I know where I come from now.
That's wonderful.
I'm so happy for you, Clark.
What? - It's nothing.
When you were a baby I used to lay by your crib at night...
...listening to you breathe.
It was hard for you.
You struggled.
And I worried all the time.
You worried the truth would come out.
No.
The truth about you is beautiful.
We saw that the moment we laid eyes on you.
We knew that one day, the whole world would see that.
I'm just...
I'm worried they'll take you away from me.
I'm not going anywhere, Mom.
I promise.
General Swanwick, sir.
What am I looking at, doc? Comet? Asteroid?
Comets don't make course corrections, general.
Wanted you to see this before some amateur with a telescope creates a worldwide panic.
The ship appears to have...
...inserted itself into a lunar synchronous orbit...
...though I have no idea why.
Have you tried... communicating with it?
Well, they haven't responded as of yet.
I'm just speculating, but I think whoever's at the helm of that thing...
...is looking to make a dramatic entrance.
Anybody know where we keep the toner?
- What's going on? - It's all over the news.
You gotta see this.
Clark.
Yeah?
Coming.
This is a breaking news. An unidentified...
You are not alone.
You are not alone.
You are not alone.
You are not alone.
It's coming in on the RSS feeds.
You are not alone.
It's on my phone too.
My name is General Zod.
I come from a world far from yours.
I have journeyed across an ocean of stars to reach you.
For some time, your world has sheltered one of my citizens.
I request that you return this individual...
...to my custody.
For reasons unknown, he has chosen to keep his existence...
...a secret from you.
He will have made efforts to blend in.
He will look like you.
But he is not one of you.
To those of you who may know...
...of his current location...
...the fate of your planet...
...rests in your hands.
To Kal-El, I say this:
Surrender within 24 hours...
...or watch this world suffer the consequences.
We hardly know anything about him, isn't that right?
If he truly means us no harm...
...he'll turn himself in and face the consequences.
And if he won't do that...
...then maybe we should.
The Daily Planet's Lois Lane knows who this guy is. She's...
...the one we should be questioning.
Hold on. You're saying Lois Lane- - Hello?
Are you watching this crap? Been running all morning.
For once I agree with Woodburn. Have you seen him?
- Do you know where he is? - No. Even if I did, I wouldn't say.
The entire world is being threatened here.
This is not time for you to fall...
...back on journalistic integrity.
This is serious, Lois.
The FBI is here. They're throwing around words like "treason. "
I gotta go.
FBI. Hands up.
Drop the bag. Now.
Regarding the visitors themselves we know...
...very little. According to government officials...
...the visitors do not represent a threat...
...despite the ominous tone of their message.
Then of course there's the question on everyone's mind:
"Who is this Kal-El person? Does he actually exist?
How could he have remained hidden from us for so long?"
Come on, Kent.
Come on. Fight back.
Get up, Kent.
So is that it?
Is that all you've got?
Come on, Kent.
Come on!
Did they hurt you?
You know they can't.
That's not what I meant. I meant, are you all right?
I wanted to hit that kid. I wanted to hit him bad.
I know you did. I mean...
...part of me even wanted you to, but then what?
Make you feel any better?
You just have to decide what kind of man you want to grow up to be, Clark.
Because whoever that man is, good character or bad, he's...
He's gonna change the world.
What's on your mind?
I don't know where to start.
Wherever you want.
That ship that appeared last night.
I'm the one they're looking for.
Do you know...
...why they want you?
No. But this General Zod...
...even if I surrender, there's no guarantee he'll keep his word, but...
...if there's a chance I can save Earth by turning myself in...
...shouldn't I take it?
What does your gut tell you?
Zod can't be trusted.
The problem is...
...I'm not sure the people of Earth can be either.
Sometimes you have to take a leap of faith first.
The trust part comes later.
All right. You've got our attention.
What is it you want?
I would like to speak to Lois Lane.
What makes you think she's here?
Don't play games with me, general.
I'll surrender, but only if you guarantee Lois's freedom.
Why are you surrendering to Zod?
I'm surrendering to mankind. There's a difference.
You let them handcuff you?
Wouldn't be much of a surrender if I resisted.
And if it makes them feel more secure...
...then all the better for it.
What's the S stand for?
It's not an S.
On my world it means hope.
Well, here, it's an S.
How about...
...Super-
Sir?
- Hi, my name is Dr. E- Emil Hamilton.
I know, I can see your ID tag in your breast pocket.
Along with a half-eaten roll of Lifesavers.
I can also see the soldiers in the next room...
...preparing that tranquilizing agent of yours.
You won't need it.
Sir, you can't expect us to not take precautions.
You could be carrying some kind of alien pathogen.
Been here for 33 years, doctor.
- Haven't infected anyone yet. - That you know of. We have legitimate...
...security concerns. You revealed your identity to Miss Lane over there.
Why won't you do the same with us?
Let's put our cards on the table here, general.
You're scared because you can't control me.
You don't, and you never will.
But that doesn't mean I'm your enemy.
Then who is?
Zod?
That's what I'm worried about.
Be that as it may...
...I've been given orders to hand you over to him.
Do what you have to do, general.
Thank you.
For what?
For believing in me.
Didn't make much difference in the end.
It did to me.
They're coming.
You should leave now.
Go, Lois.
Kal-El.
I'm sub-commander Faora-Ul.
On behalf of General Zod, I extend you his greetings.
- Are you the ranking officer here? - I am.
General Zod would like this woman...
...to accompany me.
You asked for the alien.
You didn't say anything about one of our own.
Shall I tell the general you're unwilling to comply?
I don't care what you tell him.
It's all right.
I'll go.
The atmospheric composition on our ship is not compatible with humans.
You need to wear a breather...
...beyond this point.
Kal-El.
You have no idea how long...
...we've been searching for you.
I take it you're Zod?
General Zod.
- Our commander. - It's all right, Faora.
We can forgive Kal any lapses in decorum.
He's a stranger to our ways.
This should be cause...
...for celebration, not conflict.
Unh. Not conflict.
I...
...feel strange.
Weak.
What's happening to him?
He's rejecting our ship's atmospherics.
Clark.
You've spent a lifetime adapting to Earth's ecology...
...but never adapted to ours.
Help him.
I can't. Whatever's happening...
- ... has to run its course. Clark.
Help him.
Help him.
Hello, Kal.
Or do you prefer Clark?
That's the name they gave you.
Isn't it?
I was Krypton's military leader...
...your father our foremost scientist.
The only thing we agreed on...
...was that Krypton was dying. In return for my efforts...
...to protect our civilization...
...and save our planet...
...I and my fellow officers were sentenced to the Phantom Zone.
And then the destruction of our world...
...freed us.
We were adrift, destined to float...
...amongst the ruins of our planet...
...until we starved.
How did you find your way to Earth?
We managed to retrofit the phantom projector into a hyperdrive.
Your father made a similar modification to the craft that brought you here.
And so the instrument of our damnation...
...became our salvation.
We sought out the old colonial outposts...
...looking for signs of life.
But all we found was death.
Cut off from Krypton, these outposts...
...withered and died long ago.
We salvaged what we could...
...armor, weapons...
...even a world engine.
For 33 years we prepared...
...until finally we detected a distress beacon...
...which you triggered...
...when you accessed the ancient scout ship.
You led us here, Kal.
Now it's within your power...
...to save what remains of your race.
On Krypton...
...the genetic template for every being yet to be born...
...is encoded in the registry of citizens.
Your father stole the registry's Codex...
...and stored it in the capsule that brought you here.
For what purpose?
So that Krypton can live again...
...on Earth.
Where is the Codex, Kal?
If Krypton lives again...
...what happens to Earth?
The foundation has to be built on something.
Even your father recognized that.
No, Zod.
I can't be a part of this.
Then what can you be a part of?
No!
Zod!
No!
No!
Your father acquitted...
...himself with honor, Kal.
You killed him?
I did.
And not a day goes by where it doesn't haunt me.
But if I had to do it again, I would.
I have a duty to my people...
...and I will not allow anyone to prevent me from carrying it out.
What's the sit-rep, major?
DSP pinged two bogeys launching from the alien ship.
- Put it up. - Yes, sir.
There it is.
Re-task Ikon-4...
- ... and get me a closer look. Yes, sir.
Command, the word...
...of the day is trident.
We have two alien craft on aggressive approach.
Ikon-4 coming online.
Air speed?
380 knots, entering Kansas...
...airspace. Not responding to our hails.
You're wasting your efforts.
The strength you derived from the Earth's sun...
...has been neutralized aboard our ship.
Here...
...in this environment...
...you are as weak as a human.
Where did you come from?
The command key, Miss Lane.
Thanks to you, I'm uploading to the ship's mainframe.
Who are you?
I am Kal's father.
Can you help us?
I designed this ship.
I can modify its atmospheric composition...
...to human compatibility.
We can stop them.
We can send them back to the Phantom Zone.
How?
I can teach you.
And in turn, you can teach Kal.
Will you help me?
The ship's crew are alerted.
We need to move quickly.
Retrieve the command key.
- Did you do that? - Yes. Pick up her sidearm.
What's happening?
To your right.
Fire.
Behind you.
Secure yourself inside the open pod.
Safe travels, Miss Lane. It's unlikely...
...we'll see each other again.
Remember, the phantom drives are essential in stopping them.
Move your head to the left.
Is it true what Zod said about the Codex?
Strike that panel.
We wanted you to learn...
...what it meant to be human first...
...so that one day, when the time was right, you could be the bridge...
...between two peoples.
Look.
Lois.
You can save her, Kal.
You can save all of them.
You'll be safe here.
- Are you all right? - Yeah.
I'm sorry.
I didn't wanna tell them anything, but they did something to me.
- They looked inside my mind- - It's okay, Lois.
They did the same thing to me.
Clark!
The craft he arrived in...
...where is it?
Go to hell.
There.
The Codex is not here.
Where has he hidden it?
I don't know.
Where is the Codex?!
You think you can threaten my mother?!
What have you done to me?
My parents taught me to hone...
...my senses, Zod.
Focus...
...on just what I wanted to see.
Without your helmet...
...you're getting everything.
And it hurts...
...doesn't it?
Get away from the window.
Get inside. It's not safe.
All players, this is Guardian. I am airborne mission commander.
I have previously encountered and observed...
...the beings we're about to engage.
They are extremely dangerous and we have been authorized...
...to use deadly force.
Roger, Guardian, we are inbound to target.
Cleared hot. Weapons free.
Copy, 11. Weapons free.
Thunder 11...
...tally three targets.
Thunder 11...
...good hit. Request immediate re-attack.
Roger, Guardian. We'll make a second gun run...
...on a heading of 212 degrees.
Thunder 11, eject!
Eject!
Thunder 11, eject!
I have a bogey incoming!
Oh, shit.
You are weak...
...son of El.
Unsure of yourself.
The fact that you possess a sense of morality...
...and we do not...
...gives us an evolutionary advantage.
And if history has proven anything...
...it is that evolution always wins.
CCT, we're approaching...
...LZ Jayhawk. Get down in five.
Let's go. Go to the LZ.
Roger, sarge. let's go!
All rangers, I need you...
...to engage the targets.
Guardian, this is Badger 01.
What about the guy in blue?
I said engage...
...all targets.
You okay?
We're auto-rotating, going in hard.
Brace for impact.
Brace for impact.
We're going in hard!
Fallen angel. Fallen angel. Guardian is down. I repeat, Guardian is down.
Guardian, do you read?
Thunder 12, calling Guardian.
- Do you read? - Thunder 12...
...this is Guardian.
Put down everything you've got north of my position.
- This will be danger-close. - Copy, danger-close.
Good luck, sir.
A good death is its own reward.
You will not win.
For every human you save...
...we will kill a million more. Unh!
Do we have an all clear? Do we have an all clear?
Alpha team, sit-rep. Alpha team.
Do you copy? Alpha team.
This man is not our enemy.
Thank you, colonel.
Mom?
I'm all right.
Nice suit, son.
I'm so sorry.
It's only stuff, Clark.
It can always be replaced.
But you can't be.
Mom, Zod said this Codex...
...he's looking for can bring my people back.
Isn't that a good thing?
I don't think they're interested in sharing this world.
Clark.
Clark.
I know how to stop them.
What happened down there?
He exposed a temporary weakness.
It is of little consequence...
...because I have located the Codex.
It was never in the capsule.
Jor-el took the Codex...
...the DNA of a billion people, then he bonded it...
...within his son's individual...
...cells.
All of Krypton's heirs...
...living hidden in one refugee's body.
Does Kal-El need to be alive...
...for us to extract the Codex from his cells?
No.
Release the world engine.
What just happened?
The ship just split in two.
Track one is heading east, track two to the southern hemisphere.
How fast is that bogey moving? Approaching...
...Mach 24 and accelerating.
It's gonna impact somewhere in the Indian Ocean.
The rest of the ship is descending.
Put it on the board now.
Yes, sir.
Oh, my God.
Bring the phantom drive online.
We are now slave to the world engine.
Initiate.
What have they hit us with? - Looks like some kind of gravity...
...weapon. It's working in tandem with their ship.
Somehow they're increasing the Earth's mass...
...clouding the atmosphere with particulates.
Oh, my God.
They're terraforming.
What's that?
Planetary engineering...
...modifying the Earth's atmosphere and topography.
Turning Earth into Krypton.
- But what happens to us? - Based on these readings...
- ... there won't be an "us. " General Swanwick, sir.
I'm on with the control tower.
Colonel Hardy's on his way and he's got Superman in tow.
Superman?
The alien, sir.
That's what they're calling him. Superman.
We have a plan, general.
Is that what I think it is?
It's the ship he arrived in.
This ship is powered by something called a phantom drive.
It bends space.
Zod's ship uses the same technology, and if we can make the two drives collide-
A singularity can be created.
- Like a black hole. Yes.
So if we open up this doorway...
...they should be pulled back in.
So you want us to bomb them with that?
General, that craft maxes out...
...17,000 pounds, we can drop it from a C-17.
It's a viable plan.
If I don't stop that machine over the Indian Ocean...
...the gravity field will continue...
...to expand.
If that thing is making Earth more like Krypton...
...won't you be weaker around it?
Maybe.
I'm not about to let that stop me from trying.
You might want to step back a little bit.
Maybe a little bit more.
Faora.
Take command.
Yes, sir. - I need to secure the genesis chamber...
...and pay my respects to an old friend.
Guardian en route to Metropolis...
...package in tow.
Be advised, F-35s inbound to rendezvous point.
You should have visual contact now.
Command key accepted. Genesis chamber coming online, sir.
Stop this, Zod...
...while there's still time.
Haven't given up lecturing me, have you, even in death?
I will not let you use the Codex like this.
You don't have the power to stop me.
The command key I have entered is revoking your authority.
This ship is now under my control.
Northcom, Lightning 1, request...
- ... permission to unleash the hounds. Lightning 1...
...you are clear to engage. Send battle damage assessment when able. Out.
Avionics are going haywire. The gravity field...
...is pulling our missiles down. We gotta get closer.
All right, everybody...
...we're leaving. We're leaving the building now.
I just lost my wingman.
Mayday! Mayday! Mayday!
Everybody, this way! Come on!
Everybody, come on! Keep moving, keep moving.
Jenny!
Oh, my God.
Perry!
Go! There! Go!
Our people can co-exist.
So we can suffer through years of pain trying to adapt like your son has?
- You're talking about genocide. - Yes.
And I'm arguing its merits with a ghost.
We're both ghosts, Zod.
Can't you see that? The Krypton you're clinging onto is gone.
Ship, have you managed to quarantine this invasive intelligence?
- You'll fail. I have.
Then prepare to terminate it.
- I'm tired of this debate. - Silencing me...
...won't change anything.
My son...
...is twice the man you were.
And he will finish what we started.
I can promise you that.
Tell me...
...you have Jor-El's memories, his conscience.
Can you experience...
...his pain?
I will harvest the Codex from your son's corpse...
...and I will rebuild Krypton...
...atop his bones.
Jenny.
- Jenny. Jenny, where are you? - I'm here!
- I'm here. Here. Jenny.
Hold on, hold on.
I'm stuck.
- I can't get free. I'm stuck. - Okay.
We'll get you out of there, all right? Just sit tight.
No, no, no!
- Don't leave me. - We're not gonna leave you.
- Okay. - Lombard!
- Get your ass over here and help me. - Damn it.
We just gotta move this. Here.
Slide that in. You push, I'll pull, okay?
Go.
Push! - Oh, my God.
It's getting closer! Come on, push!
Northcom, this is Guardian. Are we cleared?
Negative, Guardian.
Come on! Push!
He did it.
Northcom, this is Guardian.
We're passing through phase line red. Good to go.
Godspeed, Guardian.
Arm the package. You are cleared hot.
We're lining up for the final run.
It's up to you and Hamilton now.
You gotta be kidding me.
Loadmaster, is the package...
...ready to drop?
Negative, Guardian.
There's something wrong. It's not supposed to do this.
What's it supposed to do?
- It's supposed to go in all the way. Let me take a look.
Co-pilot's aircraft.
Co-pilot's aircraft.
We are lined up for the drop. What's the hold up?
We've had a setback.
Target that aircraft.
Target locked.
Stop!
If you destroy this ship...
...you destroy Krypton!
Krypton had its chance.
Miss Lane! It's not safe for you...
...over there!
Miss Lane!
Move now! Go!
A good death...
...is its own reward.
Are they gone?
I think so.
He saved us.
You know, they say it's all downhill after the first kiss.
I'm pretty sure that only counts when you're kissing a human.
Look at this.
We could have built a new Krypton...
...in this squalor.
But you chose the humans over us.
I exist...
...only to protect Krypton.
That is the sole purpose for which I was born.
And every action I take...
...no matter how violent...
...or how cruel...
...is for the greater good...
...of my people.
And now...
...I have no people.
My soul...
...that is what you have taken...
...from me.
I'm going to make them suffer, Kal.
These humans you've adopted, I will take them all from you...
- ... one by one. - You're a monster, Zod...
...and I'm gonna stop you.
There's only...
...one way this ends, Kal.
Either you die...
...or I do.
I was bred to be a warrior, Kal.
Trained my entire life...
...to master my senses.
Where did you train? On a farm?
If you love...
...these people so much...
...you can mourn for them.
Don't do this!
Stop!
Stop!
Never.
Are you effing stupid?
It's one of your surveillance drones.
That's a $12,000,000 piece of hardware.
It was.
I know you're trying to find out where I hang my cape.
- You won't. - Then I'll ask...
...the obvious question:
How do we know you won't one day act against America's interests?
I grew up in Kansas, general.
I'm about as American as it gets.
Look...
...I'm here to help...
...but it has to be on my own terms.
You have to convince Washington of that.
Even if I were willing to try, what makes you think they'd listen?
I don't know, general.
Guess I'll just have to trust you.
What are you smiling about?
Nothing, sir.
I just think he's kind of hot.
- Get in the car, captain. - Mm-hm. Yes, sir.
He always believed you were meant for greater things.
And that when the day came...
...your shoulders would be able to bear the weight.
Yeah, I just wish he could have been here to see it finally happen.
He saw it, Clark, believe me.
What are you going to do when you're not saving the world?
- Have you given any thought to that? - I have, actually. Heh, heh.
I gotta find a job where I can keep my ear to the ground.
Where people won't look twice...
...when I want to go somewhere dangerous and start asking questions.
Come on, Lois. When are you gonna throw me a bone?
Courtside seats to the game tonight.
- What do you say? - I say...
...you should go back to trolling the intern pool.
You'll probably have more luck. Sorry.
Courtside?
Don't. Ha, ha, ha. - No.
Lombard, Lane, I want you to meet our new stringer.
I want you to show him the ropes. This is Clark Kent.
Good luck, kid.
Hey. Steve.
- Nice to meet you. You too.
Hi.
Lois Lane.
Welcome to the Planet.
Glad to be here, Lois.
Manufacturer's protocol dictates I cannot be captured.
I must be destroyed.
Nevarro is a very fine planet.
And now that the scum and villainy have been washed away,
it's very respectable again.
You do not cover your face. You are not Mandalorian.
You are a Child of the Watch.
There is only one way. The Way of the Mandalore.
Din Djarin, have you ever removed your helmet?
I have.
Then, you are a Mandalorian no more.
How can I atone?
According to Creed,
one may only be redeemed in the Living Waters
beneath the mines of Mandalore.
But the mines have all been destroyed.
This is the Way.
I swear on my name and the names of the ancestors...
"I swear on my name and the names of the ancestors..."
That I shall walk the Way of the Mand'alor...
"That I shall walk the Way of the Mand'alor..."
And the words of the Creed shall be forever forged in my heart.
"And the words of the Creed shall be forever forged in my heart."
This is the Way.
"This is the Way."
This is the Way.
From this moment on, I shall never remove my helmet.
"From this moment on, I shall never..."
Go! Go! Go!
Go!
Young ones, to the cave!
Get back. Get back!
I got you! I got you!
Take cover!
Cover them!
To the sky!
Go
All hands, go!
Get down!
You have removed your helmet.
What's worse, you did so of your own free will.
You are no longer Mandalorian.
The Creed teaches us of redemption.
Redemption is no longer possible since the destruction of our homeworld.
But what if the mines of Mandalore still exist?
All was destroyed in the Purge.
Is this inscription not Mandalorian?
Where did you come upon this?
Jawas.
They came upon it by trade from a traveler
who claimed to have visited the surface of Mandalore.
Then this relic only proves
that Mandalore's entire surface has been crystalized by fusion rays.
But a traveler was able to retrieve this,
so perhaps, it is not poisoned.
If I visit the planet and I can bring you proof
that I have bathed in the Living Waters beneath the mines of Mandalore,
then by Creed, the decree of exile will be lifted and I would be redeemed.
This is the Way.
Then I will see you again.
Welcome to Nevarro,
independent trade anchor and Outer Rim Hyperlane port.
Please state the purpose of your visit.
Here to meet an old friend.
Greetings.
Welcome to the port of Nevarro, gem of the Outer Rim.
Our esteemed High Magistrate welcomes you
and hopes that your stay will be a prosperous one.
We invite you to visit our shops and markets,
enjoy local delicacies, marvel at the black lava canyons,
or soak in the geothermal springs.
A lot has changed around here.
Do you remember your old friend?
Mando!
I heard you were back, but I didn't believe it.
Magistrate Karga.
That's High Magistrate Karga to you.
Come.
Let's catch up on old times.
It's so good to see you. Welcome back.
Doesn't even look like the same place.
I know, we've done a lot with it.
The citizens have been so instrumental in making this all work, and look at this.
We are an official trade spur of the Hydian Way.
Congratulations.
We've got a construction boom going on in the city.
The belters are mining the asteroid fields at the edge of the system.
There's a lot of money to be made on Nevarro.
I can see.
I can set you up with a prime tract right over by the hot springs.
You and the little one, you can settle down,
you can hang up your blaster.
Live off the fat of the land.
Grogu.
Come again?
His name is Grogu.
Oh. If you say so.
Come, I wanna show you something.
Now, as I was saying,
there's a beautiful parcel available right down here by the flats.
I appreciate the offer, but I have some matters to look after.
Oh, I'm confused.
I thought you had completed your mission,
but you're still running around here with the same little critter.
It's complicated.
I completed my quest.
He returned to me.
I removed my helmet, and now I'm an apostate.
Which is all the more reason for you to stay here with us.
Where you are from, you may be an apostate,
but here, you'd be landed gentry.
Magistrate.
High Magistrate.
-Yes, High Magistrate. Apologies. -Your timing couldn't be any worse.
But it's just that, there's someone here to see you.
-It can wait. -But it's pirates!
Pirates in the courtyard.
Get out of my way or I'll split your circuits.
Oh, my stars.
Stand aside, droid, don't you know who we are?
Come on, Vane.
That'll be enough of that.
Greef Karga, my old friend.
I knew you wouldn't insult us.
-Come, join us for a drink. -Yeah.
Let's continue this conversation back at my office.
This, this is a school.
Well, that explains why she wouldn't let me inside.
I forgot, it was your cut of my boss's treasure that built this saloon.
Pirate King Gorian Shard's name is familiar to all in this sector.
Come, join me for a drink back at my office.
We'll toast to your captain.
We drink here.
That is a school now.
I say it's still a bar.
Now, bring us a drink.
Is there a problem here, Magistrate?
Is there a problem here? What do you think?
Not if you serve me a drink.
Not in my school.
You hear that, boys?
His school.
You paid us for murder and mayhem inside these doors.
Sounds like you went soft.
You think so?
Try me.
Tell Captain Gorian Shard that Nevarro is no longer friendly to pirates.
Now get outta here.
Get out of here, Vane. Now.
Sure you wanna let him go?
He'll let it be known
that Nevarro is respectable now and not to be trifled with.
Have the service droids scrub up out there.
Yes, sir, right away.
I gotta level with you, Mando. I need a marshal.
What about Marshal Dune?
After she brought in Moff Gideon, she was recruited by Special Forces.
And what came of Gideon?
Ugh. He was sent off to a New Republic War Tribunal.
So... What do you say?
You ready to put on the stripes and collect a healthy stipend?
You'd make a very fine lawman.
Why not request one from the New Republic?
The last thing we intend is to bow down to yet another far-off bureaucracy.
No. Under my watch,
Nevarro will become the first truly independent trade anchor
in this entire sector.
I can't serve as your marshal.
I have something pressing to attend to.
Apologies.
I didn't know you were here on business.
What can we provide?
I need him back.
IG-11 was destroyed on the lava river.
This is just a statue.
These are his parts, are they not?
I mean, what's left of 'em.
We were lucky to recover any of his parts after he self-destructed.
I need a droid I can trust to help me explore Mandalore,
and he's that droid.
Mando, we've got plenty of droids around here, we'll find you one.
I guarantee it.
Let me give it a shot.
There.
He's hooked up to power.
Let's see if we can wake him up.
There you go.
Subparagraph sixteen-teen-teen
of the Bondsman Guild protocol waiver...
Immediately produce said...
The bounty is mine. Asset to be terminated.
Terminate asset. Terminate asset.
Greef!
Terminate asset.
-Mando, shoot it! Shoot it! -Terminate.
Now that's using your head.
I think he defaulted to his old programming.
You think?
That's too big a job for you to do by yourself.
Fortunately, Nevarro has attracted the best droidsmiths of the Outer Rim.
They'll have IG back to his old self in no time.
Are you sure they're up for it?
I don't think I can handle him with all his limbs if things go scud.
Why don't you ask 'em for yourself?
Who?
The Anzellans.
What do you want?
No. Can't fix. No. No, no. The broken.
Uh... Okay.
The broken. It broke.
I don't understand. Do you speak Huttese?
Mando, he said he can't fix it.
That's no good, I need this one. This one is my friend.
-It not friend anymore. -Memory circuit broken.
He says the memory circuit is shot.
No more.
Well, put in a new one.
-No, no, no, no. -Not work.
-Don't make new one. Very hard to find. -No.
He said they don't make 'em anymore. They're very hard to find.
-I got it. -Buy new droid.
This one poodoo.
He says you should get a new one.
Can you fix it without the memory circuit?
Yes, but IG no think.
What if I find you the part?
Okay, now. Then no problem. We fix.
If you can get a new part, he says he can fix it.
-No! No! No! No! No! No, down, down! -No, Grogu.
-He's not a pet. -No squeezie. Not squeeze.
Not squeeze.
Bad baby!
-Oh, he's a bad baby. -Sorry about that. He's young.
Yeah, bad baby. Oh!
No, Grogu.
We hope to see you soon.
Keep IG-11 safe until I get back with that part.
If the Anzellans can't find it, I don't know who can.
Safe travels.
Being a Mandalorian's not just learning about how to fight,
you also have to know how to navigate the galaxy,
because you never know where you might be headed next.
This here is your hyperspace map.
You determine your range by looking at your fuel gauge.
And this...
...is your enemy proximity warning indicator.
Hang on, kid, we got pirates.
Avast, Mandalorian.
You can't just sneak away
after cuttin' down four of my brothers in cold blood.
We're Pirate King Gorian Shard's men, now you'll answer to him.
Gorian Shard should stick to hijacking and ransoming.
After him!
Three more.
Has anyone got eyes on the Mandalorian?
Not yet.
Bringing the Mandalorian to you, Captain.
Dank farrik.
They have a target lock on us.
Stop where you are, Mandalorian.
You're outgunned.
I have no quarrel with you, Gorian Shard.
What a kind sentiment from a man who just destroyed four of my fighters.
Surrender your ship and I will spare your life.
Kid.
Never trust a pirate.
This is Kalevala.
It's another planet in the Mandalorian system.
And that is a Mandalorian castle.
Bo-Katan.
It is Din Djarin.
I am here to join you.
There's nothing left to join.
What of your plans to retake Mandalore?
When I returned without the Darksaber, my forces melted away.
Where is the stolen fleet?
Making their way through the galaxy as mercenaries.
Do you still have the saber?
I do.
Then you lead them.
Wave that thing around and they'll do whatever you say.
So you gave up your designs to retake Mandalore?
Your cult gave up on Mandalore long before the Purge.
Where were you then?
The Children of the Watch and all the factions that came before
fractured and shattered our people.
Go home.
There's nothing left.
I am going to Mandalore
so that I may bathe in the Living Waters and be forgiven for my transgressions.
You are a fool.
There's nothing magic about the mines of Mandalore.
They supplied beskar ore to our ancestors and the rest is superstition.
That planet has been ravaged, plundered, and poisoned.
You said that the curse was a lie.
Make up your mind.
If you want to go to the mines, be my guest.
They're beneath the civic center in the city of Sundari.
Thank you.
And I will find out if the planet is really poisoned.
Goodbye, Din Djarin.
Redemption is no longer possible since the destruction of our homeworld.
But what if the mines of Mandalore still exist?
If I visit the planet
and I can bring you proof that I have bathed in the Living Waters,
then by Creed, I would be redeemed.
The songs of eons past
foretold of the Mythosaur rising up to herald a new age of Mandalore.
Have you ever heard of Bo-Katan Kryze?
Bo-Katan Kryze was born of a mighty house,
but they lost sight of the Way.
She once laid claim to rule Mandalore
based purely on blood and the sword you now possess.
Her rule ended in tragedy.
Bo-Katan, I am going to Mandalore.
That planet has been ravaged, plundered, and poisoned.
There's nothing left.
I don't know what to tell you, pal.
I mean, there are a lot of parts missing.
Fine, I'll push it back out on the street. You heard him, pit droids! Out!
All right, well, I don't appreciate the tone of voice, but I'll fix it.
Oof. Boy, I don't know.
I mean, lucky for you, business is slow.
I gotta order the parts from the Mid Rim.
Let's say, mmm, two months.
All right, settle your snout. I'll put a rush on it.
But you gotta give me half upfront for parts.
I should charge you more considering now I gotta work Boonta Eve.
Me?
You know, I do have a life.
Big holiday. I had big plans!
You know, I just don't sit around here
and work all day, I'm very popular.
Is he gone?
Hey, tell the Jawas the Rodian left.
All right, let's get this thing back together again.
Quickly, before he sees you.
Put those parts back on the speeder.
Paint 'em so they look different. Here you go.
Seriously? For five minutes of work?
You're lucky I'm a softy.
Go strip another speeder. It's Boonta Eve, it's ripe.
Whoo-hoo! You hear that? She's purring like a nuzzle shrew.
No complaints.
Still faster than I know what to do with.
Well, I'll tune her up, just the same.
So, uh, where's my guy?
Huh? There he is!
Now who taught you how to leap like a Lurmen, huh?
Was that his first word?
I think he's talking to me.
Did you hear that? He said "Peli."
I'm here on business.
Oh, are the Hutts back? Are you takin' out Boba Fett?
I need a droid part.
Ugh. Boring!
Hey, get the Jawas back in here before they hit the cantina.
You know how Mos Eisley gets during Boonta week.
I'm looking for a replacement IG memory circuit.
Oh. Hey, grandpa. They haven't made those for a while.
Sorry, pal, no chance cubes.
-They can't find the part? -Nope.
I need my droid fixed now.
Which is why I think you should buy this beauty here.
I can't use an astromech.
I need a droid that's rated for spelunking.
Spelunking? What are you spelunking?
I'm going to Mandalore.
I need a droid that can explore ahead of me and test the atmosphere,
make sure it's safe to breathe.
Okay, well...
Uh-uh-uh-uh. Hey! Get right back here. Right back here, scaredy droid.
Come on now, you gotta shine.
This R5 astromech is built for adventure.
What?
Of course you are.
You're supposed to be piloting starfighters
across the galaxy and fighting tyranny.
It's falling apart, and besides, I got no room for it on the N-1.
Nonsense.
R5-D4 is as good as the day it came back from serving in the Rebellion.
And I'll reinstall your droid port
and this little baby here can even co-pilot.
Hey, if you don't settle your bolts, I'll sell you back to the Jawas.
And because it's Boonta,
what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna give you this for half the price
and throw in a free oil bath.
Oh, come on now, don't be a coward.
You're an astromech, act like one.
I wouldn't rely too much on this one. Its circuitry is a little fragile.
I thought you said it was built for adventure.
What? Sorry, I can't hear you!
May the Force be with you!
All right, kid.
You ready for an adventure?
It looks scary. I know.
But it was once green and beautiful, back when the songs were written.
It's Mandalore, the homeworld of our people.
Every Mandalorian can trace their roots back to this planet,
And you know what?
I've never been there either.
I grew up there. On that moon.
Concordia.
And that's Kalevala where we visited Bo-Katan.
It's in the same system.
A Mandalorian has to understand maps and know their way around.
That way, you'll never be lost.
Looks like the fusion bombs from the Purge
disrupted the magnetic field around the planet.
From the surface,
we won't be able to communicate with anyone out of atmosphere,
so we have to be careful.
Down here, we're completely cut off
R5, you ready?
I'm gonna need you to scout ahead and analyze the atmosphere.
That wasn't a question.
Go over to that split in the rock, and take an air sample of the ruins below.
The droid will be fine.
I just need him to take some readings to make sure it's safe.
Don't be a baby.
Just get the samples we need, and hurry up.
Here, look.
You can watch him on the scope.
R5, come in. Do you read me?
It's probably just interference.
Fine. I'll go get him.
Normally, this is droid work.
I was hoping to avoid going out there.
I'll pressurize my helmet, seal yourself in your pod.
Don't worry, kid, I'll be right back.
Yeah, wait.
Okay, you're all right.
Now come on, let's get you back to the ship.
Not until I check the toxicity.
You got an analysis on the atmosphere yet?
The charts were wrong.
The atmosphere is breathable.
Bo-Katan was right.
Mandalore is not cursed.
That's the Civic Center.
This is where Bo-Katan said to go.
The mines should be further down.
I guess we're on our own from here.
These waters should flow down to the mines,
and the Living Waters within.
Look, that passage heads down.
Get to Bo-Katan.
Your Majesty.
An unscheduled visitor.
Let's get rid of him once and for all.
Maybe I didn't make myself clear the last time.
I want to be left alone.
What happened to him?
Download the astromech. Find out where they were.
It didn't always look like this.
Okay, kid. I'm gonna need you to guide me to him.
Can you do that?
This was once a beautiful civilization.
My family ruled it all.
Now it's a tomb.
Let's go.
I know that you're frightened.
But I need you to guide me to him.
I knew quite a few Jedi, you know.
I don't know what they taught you about us,
but there was a time we actually got along quite well.
Fought side by side.
How good are you with the Force?
You must be quite good at it if you got back to me all alone.
Did you think your dad was the only Mandalorian?
Those are Alamites, and we were their next meal.
They used to live in the surface wastelands beyond our cities.
If they survived, I wonder what else might have, too.
Din, are you okay?
Can you hear me?
It's Bo-Katan.
I'm gonna get you out of here, all right?
Can you move at all?
Din, I can't hear you.
Are you trying to say something?
Behind you.
What happened?
I saved your life.
How did you find me?
Your kid.
He's tougher than he looks.
And he's quite the navigator.
Thank you for rescuing me.
You were right.
Mandalore is not cursed.
Was I?
Look around.
There's nothing left.
A great society is now a memory.
I once ruled here for a brief time.
Now, it's destroyed.
Nothing to cling to but ashes.
What is this?
You've never eaten pog soup?
No.
Can you appreciate the irony?
Any Mandalorian worth their armor
was raised on this since they were his size.
You should rest.
I'll get you back to my ship soon enough.
I'm not going with you.
What are you talking about?
I must continue to the Mines of Mandalore
so that I may be redeemed.
I honestly think that it's adorable
that you actually believe these children's stories.
But there is nothing magic about the waters.
Without the Creed, what are we?
What do we stand for?
Our people are scattered like stars in the galaxy.
The Creed is how we survived.
You rescued me and I'll always be in your debt.
But I can't go with you until I fulfill my obligation.
I will take you.
-To the Living Waters? -Yes.
You'd never find them on your own.
Not in all this wreckage.
Thank you.
Don't thank me until you see them.
It's hard to believe that this all was once filled with our kind.
It wasn't that long ago.
You'd never know it looking at all this destruction.
It looks like it's been centuries.
The Empire set out to punish us.
To wipe away our memory.
It must pain you to see it like this
after witnessing its beauty.
What pains me is seeing our own kind fight one another time and time again.
Killing each other for reasons too confusing to explain.
It made us weak.
We had no hope to resist being smashed by the fist of the Empire.
There.
The entrance to the Mines of Mandalore.
This area looks much older.
The mines have been here for thousands of years.
The Living Waters are in the chambers below.
Have you been there?
Yes, when I was a child.
Really?
I was part of the royal family.
I took the Creed and was showered with gifts.
But the rituals were all just theater for our subjects.
They loved watching the princess recite the Mandalorian tenets
as her father looked on proudly.
Such a heart-warming spectacle.
Maybe he was proud.
I know he was.
I didn't embarrass him in front of everyone.
Your father sounds like an interesting man.
I would've liked to have known him.
He was a great man.
He died defending Mandalore.
This is the Way.
What are you lookin' at?
Here you go. The Living Waters.
Hold on.
I want you to get the full tour.
"These mines date back to the age of the first Mandalore.
"According to ancient folklore, the mines were once a Mythosaur lair.
"Mandalore the Great is said to have tamed the mythical beast.
"It is from these legends that the skull signet was adopted
"and became the symbol of our planet."
This is it.
Din? Are you all right?
"I swear on my name."
"And the names of the Ancestors,
"that I shall walk the way of the Mand'alor...
"and the words of the Creed shall be forever forged in my heart."